*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK TRACTATUS LOGICO-PHILOSOPHICUS *** Character set encoding : ISO-8859-1 Language : German Release Date : October 22 , 2010 EBook #5740 ] Translator : C . K . Ogden Contributor : Bertrand Russell Author : Ludwig Wittgenstein Title : Tractatus Logico-Philosophicus with this eBook or online at www . gutenberg . org re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included almost no restrictions whatsoever . You may copy it , give it away or This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with Project Gutenberg’s Tractatus Logico-Philosophicus , by Ludwig Wittgenstein E in the L T X source code . A possible . Minor typesetting errors have been corrected ; all changes are detailed Every effort has been made to replicate the original text as faithfully as have been italicised in this e-book . In the German part of the original , variables were printed upright ; they replaced with the correct ‘∨’ character . The original used a lower-case ‘v’ for the logical or operator ; it has been linked back and forth between the languages . the German original after that . In the PDF file , the proposition numbers are This e-book has been reformatted to contain the English translation first and even pages contained the German original , odd pages the English translation . The original publication was a parallel translation ; after the introduction , TRANSCRIBER’S NOTE Distributed Proofreading Team at http : www . pgdp . net Produced by Jana Srna , Norbert H . Langkau , and the Online Magdalene College , Cambridge ) General Editor : C . K . Ogden , m . a . Philosophy and Scientific Method International Library of Psychology 1922 NEW YORK : HARCOURT , BRACE COMPANY , INC . KEGAN PAUL , TRENCH , TRUBNER CO . , LTD . LONDON BERTRAND RUSSELL , F . R . S . With an Introduction by LUDWIG WITTGENSTEIN By Logico-Philosophicus Tractatus 9 AND 11 YOUNG STREET , EDINBURGH . PRINTED IN GREAT BRITAIN BY THE EDINBURGH PRESS , C . K . O . in the preparation of the book for the press . Trinity College , Cambridge , for assistance both with the translation and Editor further desires to express his indebtedness to Mr F . P . Ramsey , of 1921 ) have been very carefully revised by the author himself ; and the appeared in the final number of Ostwald’s Annalen der Naturphilosophie The proofs of the translation and the version of the original which to which objection might otherwise be taken as over-literal . of the whole . As a result , a certain latitude has been possible in passages ties raised by the vocabulary and in view of the peculiar literary character of presentation seemed desirable both on account of the obvious difficul- of printing the original side by side with the translation . Such a method able for English readers , the somewhat unusual course has been adopted In rendering Mr Wittgenstein’s Tractatus Logico-Philosophicus avail- NOTE 7 tions for uniqueness of meaning or reference in symbols or combinations sense rather than nonsense in combinations of symbols ; 2 ) the condi- problems to deal with in regard to Symbolism : 1 ) the conditions for vague , so that what we assert is never quite precise . Thus , logic has two something quite definite . In practice , language is always more or less for accurate Symbolism , i . e . for Symbolism in which a sentence “means” which Mr Wittgenstein is concerned . He is concerned with the conditions symbol for that other ? This last is a logical question , and is the one with such as a sentence ) have to another in order to be capable of being a question . Fourthly , there is the question : what relation must one fact the special sciences dealing with the subject-matter of the sentences in sentences so as to convey truth rather than falsehood ; this belongs to problem belongs to epistemology . Thirdly , there is the problem of using thoughts , words , or sentences , and that which they refer to or mean ; this ondly , there is the problem as to what is the relation subsisting between of meaning something by it ; this problem belongs to psychology . Sec- actually occurs in our minds when we use language with the intention various problems as regards language . First , there is the problem what which would have to be fulfilled by a logically perfect language . There are theory which deals with Symbolism he is concerned with the conditions alize what is the problem with which he is concerned . In the part of his In order to understand Mr Wittgenstein’s book , it is necessary to re- Mystische ) . Knowledge , Principles of Physics , Ethics , and finally the Mystical das ference are first dealt with . Thence we pass successively to Theory of The logical structure of propositions and the nature of logical in- the principles of Symbolism and out of misuse of language . traditional philosophy and traditional solutions arise out of ignorance of various departments of traditional philosophy , showing in each case how words and things in any language , it applies the result of this inquiry to principles of Symbolism and the relations which are necessary between sidered an important event in the philosophical world . Starting from the certainly deserves , by its breadth and scope and profundity , to be con- not it prove to give the ultimate truth on the matters with which it deals , Mr Wittgenstein’s Tractatus Logico-Philosophicus , whether or By BERTRAND RUSSELL INTRODUCTION 8 but not a Sachverhalt . Tatsache , whereas “Socrates is wise and Plato is his pupil” is a Tatsache che : thus , for example , “Socrates is wise” is a Sachverhalt , as well as a whereas a fact which may consist of two or more facts is called a Tatsa- compounded of other facts are what Mr Wittgenstein calls Sachverhalte , 4 . 003 ) . What is complex in the world is a fact . Facts which are not question whether the Good is more or less identical than the Beautiful” understand the logic of our language . They are of the same kind as the and propositions of the philosophers result from the fact that we do not tions of this kind at all , but only state their senselessness . Most questions matters are not false but senseless . We cannot , therefore , answer ques- propositions and questions that have been written about philosophical of philosophical grammar , but this is unavoidable at the outset . “Most of a “complex” we are , as will appear later , sinning against the rules will be a “complex , ” containing the symbols for the parts . In speaking that is not simple will have a simple symbol . The symbol for the whole which are themselves symbols . In a logically perfect language nothing simples . A name is a simple symbol in the sense that it has no parts one name for every simple , and never the same name for two different The first requisite of an ideal language would be that there should be structure . shown , not said , for whatever we may say will still need to have the same be itself in turn said in language . It can , in his phraseology , only be in common between the sentence and the fact cannot , so he contends , fundamental thesis of Mr Wittgenstein’s theory . That which has to be the sentence and the structure of the fact . This is perhaps the most may be constructed , be something in common between the structure of sentence should assert a certain fact there must , however the language as the meaning of the component words is known . In order that a certain syntax of a language , the meaning of a sentence is determinate as soon The essential business of language is to assert or deny facts . Given the to the ideal language which we postulate . meaning , and it only fulfils this function in proportion as it approaches cally perfect language , but that the whole function of language is to have that we believe ourselves capable , here and now , of constructing a logi- logically perfect language—not that any language is logically perfect , or unique meaning . Mr Wittgenstein is concerned with the conditions for a vent nonsense , and has single symbols which always have a definite and of symbols . A logically perfect language has rules of syntax which pre- INTRODUCTION 9 all stand to one another in that pictorial internal relation which holds gramophone record , the musical thought , the score , the waves of sound , sense in which he speaks of pictures is illustrated by his statement : “The or false , but in both cases it shares the logical form with the fact . The can correspond or not correspond with the fact and be accordingly true form . The logical picture of a fact , he says , is a Gedanke . A picture that is to say , when we wish to imply no more than identity of logical so much resemblance as is essential to its being a picture in any sense , We speak of a logical picture of a reality when we wish to imply only manner—rightly or falsely—is its form of representation” 2 . 161 , 2 . 17 ) . have in common with reality in order to be able to represent it after its the one can be a picture of the other at all . What the picture must picture and the pictured there must be something identical in order that the picture its elements have a certain relation to one another . “In the have a certain relation to each other is represented by the fact that in elements of the picture : the picture itself is a fact . The fact that things a model of the reality , and to the objects in the reality correspond the 2 . 1 ) : “We make to ourselves pictures of facts . ” A picture , he says , is Mr Wittgenstein begins his theory of Symbolism with the statement that aRb” 3 . 1432 ) . Rto b’ ; but we must say , that ‘a’ stands in a certain relation to ‘b’ says must not say , the complex sign ‘aRb’ says ‘astands in a certain relation between the person’s name by the words “Plato” and “Socrates . ” “We and it is owing to this fact that our sentence is able to assert a relation word “Socrates” establishes a certain relation between these two words , rates , ” the word “loves” which occurs between the word “Plato” and the establish a relation between the two names . If we say “Plato loves Soc- will be necessary that the sentence in which you make the assertion shall names , and if you are going to assert a relation between the two men it ment that the men may be treated as simples ) , without employing two for example , to make a statement about two men assuming for the mo- In certain elementary ways this is , of course , obvious . It is impossible , assert the fact . proposition and the fact must have in common , if the proposition is to These projective properties correspond to that which in his theory the inal figure remain unchanged whichever of these ways may be adopted . sponds to a different language , but the projective properties of the orig- metrical figure may be projected in many ways : each of these ways corre- He compares linguistic expression to projection in geometry . A geo- INTRODUCTION 10 ical , not practical possibility is meant ) the constituents finally reached and “wise . ” If an atomic fact is analysed as fully as possible theoret- an atomic fact we perceive that it contains the constituents “Socrates” nevertheless does contain parts . If we may regard “Socrates is wise” as atomic fact . An atomic fact , although it contains no parts that are facts , Mr Wittgenstein a Sachverhalt . This is the same thing that he calls an an Athenian . ” A fact which has no parts that are facts is called by nian , ” consists of the two facts , “Socrates was wise , ” and “Socrates was may contain no such parts ; for example : “Socrates was a wise Athe- propositions true , or false . Facts may contain parts which are facts or but we can explain what we mean by saying that facts are what make The world consists of facts : facts cannot strictly speaking be defined , which seems to underlie his system . With this proviso we will endeavour to convey the picture of the world are all of them things which that theory itself condemns as meaningless . to be said in leading the reader to understand Mr Wittgenstein’s theory 4 . 111 and 4 . 112 ) . In accordance with this principle the things that have sharply the thoughts which otherwise are , as it were , opaque and blurred” to make propositions clear . Philosophy should make clear and delimit result of philosophy is not a number of ‘philosophical propositions , ’ but activity . A philosophical work consists essentially of elucidations . The the logical clarification of thoughts . Philosophy is not a theory but an below , but not beside the natural sciences . The object of philosophy is The word ‘philosophy’ must mean something which stands above or discussion is a mistake . “Philosophy is not one of the natural sciences . by philosophical discussion is to lead people to see that philosophical proposition is bad grammar , and the best that we can hope to achieve view that nothing correct can be said in philosophy . Every philosophical in common between a fact and its logical picture . It results from this properly philosophical belongs to what can only be shown , to what is the fact and the picture . Mr Wittgenstein maintains that everything this cannot be itself represented since it has to be in common between proposition and the fact must exhibit the same logical “manifold , ” and by signs , but are themselves present in the proposition as in the fact . The represented by signs . The so-called logical “constants” are not represented proposition representing a fact rests upon the fact that in it objects are story . They are all in a certain sense one ) ” 4 . 014 ) . The possibility of a common . Like the two youths , their two horses and their lilies in the between language and the world . To all of them the logical structure is INTRODUCTION 11 that he believes it or that pis false from the fact that he does not believe exceptionally gifted individual , we cannot infer that pis true from the fact will believe some true propositions and some false ones : unless he is an functions ; such , for example , would be “A believes p , ” for in general A sight as though there were other functions of propositions besides truth- only upon the truth or falsehood of p , q , r . It might seem at first one containing p , q , r . and such that its truth or falsehood depends of p , and similarly a truth-function of several propositions p , q , r . is such that its truth or falsehood depends only upon the truth or falsehood A truth-function of a proposition pis a proposition containing pand of the construction of truth-functions . Wittgenstein’s theory of molecular propositions turns upon his theory molecular . with propositions which are not atomic . Such propositions may be called with any other . Thus the whole business of logical inference is concerned of each other . No atomic proposition implies any other or is inconsistent an atomic proposition . All atomic propositions are logically independent be inferred . A proposition true or false ) asserting an atomic fact is called atomic facts , every true proposition , however complex , can theoretically atomic facts of which these objects are constituents . Given this total of by merely naming all the objects in it ; it is necessary also to know the with the fact that these are all of them . The world is not described The world is fully described if all atomic facts are known , together what is logically first in logic . naming of simples . In this way the naming of simples is shown to be complexes presupposes propositions , while propositions presupposes the the relatedness of the constituents of the complex . Thus the naming of of the truth of a certain proposition , namely the proposition asserting we give a name to the complex the name only has meaning in virtue are related in a certain way , which is the assertion of a fact : thus if there is a certain complex reduces to the assertion that its constituents there would still be objects and atomic facts 4 . 2211 ) . The assertion that facts and if every atomic fact consisted of an infinite number of objects facts is finite ; even if every fact consisted of an infinite number of atomic presupposes a fact . It is not necessarily assumed that the complexity of ground for maintaining that there must be simples is that every complex it . It is a logical necessity demanded by theory , like an electron . His that we can actually isolate the simple or have empirical knowledge of may be called “simples” or “objects . ” It is not contended by Wittgenstein INTRODUCTION 12 p , q , r exactly as it would in the case of a finite number of enumerated arguments and when this has been done the building up of truth-functions proceeds the generality comes only in specifying the set of propositions concerned , “ ( x ) . fx” and “ ( ∃x ) . fx” ] differs from previous methods by the fact that “ ( x ) . fx . ” Wittgenstein’s method of dealing with general propositions i . e . the proposition “fx is true for all values of x” which is represented by If we had started with not-fx instead of fx we should have arrived at is at least one xfor which fx is true” which is represented by “ ( ∃x ) . f x . ” for all values of x . ” The negation of this would be the proposition “there is ordinarily represented in mathematical logic by the words “fx is false which are values of fx . In this way we arrive at the proposition which and not-q” so as to apply to simultaneous denial of all the propositions values of fx form a set of propositions . We may extend the idea “not-p whose values are propositions ) , such as “xis human”—then the various condition . For example , let f x be a propositional function i . e . a function are not given by enumeration but are given as all those satisfying some cases where the propositions which are arguments to our truth-function analysis succeeds in extending the process to general propositions , i . e . to are given by enumeration . Wittgenstein , however , by a very interesting wanted when the propositions which are arguments to our truth-function in detail at the beginning of Principia Mathematica . This gives all that is development of other truth-functions out of “not-p” and “por q” is given the negation of “not-pand not-q , ” i . e . of our primitive function . The of our primitive function : hence we can define “por q , ” since this is equivalent to “not-p , ” hence we obtain a definition of negation in terms constructed out of “not-pand not-q” is easy to see . “Not-pand not-p” is of Dr Sheffer’s work . The manner in which other truth-functions are and not-q . ” Wittgenstein makes use of the latter , assuming a knowledge constructed out of either of the two functions “not-por not-q” or “not-p pp . 481–488 ) that all truth-functions of a given set of propositions can be It has been shown by Dr Sheffer Trans . Am . Math . Soc . , Vol . XIV . do . of the original set of atomic propositions . This Wittgenstein proceeds to generally , we can obtain a general definition of all propositions in terms really a truth-function . It follows that if we can define truth-functions exceptions are only apparent , and that every function of a proposition is maintains , however , for reasons which will appear presently , that such proposition” or “pis a proposition about Socrates . ” Mr Wittgenstein it . Other apparent exceptions would be such as “pis a very complex INTRODUCTION 13 results that nothing can be deduced from an atomic proposition . All the meaning of pis contained in the meaning of q , from which of course it truth-function of atomic propositions ; and that if pfollows from qthe the fact that it is the totality of them ) ; that a proposition is always a all that follows from the totality of atomic propositions together with consider later . Wittgenstein is enabled to assert that propositions are which we mentioned above are dealt with in a manner which we shall way the totality of propositions is defined . The apparent exceptions be constructed in the above manner from atomic propositions , and in this just been described , enables Wittgenstein to say that all propositions can of propositions that belong to logic . The method of generation which has simplification of the theory of inference , as well as a definition of the sort From this uniform method of construction we arrive at an amazing by Mr Wittgenstein’s symbol . such as are , by a uniform process , and it is this process which is indicated it follows that all propositions which are not atomic can be derived from osition as argument to a truth-function . Given these three foundations , c ) The assertion that a proposition can only occur in another prop- from conjunctions and disjunctions ; b ) Mr Wittgenstein’s theory of the derivation of general propositions simultaneous negation , i . e . out of “not-pand not-q” ; a ) Sheffer’s proof that all truth-functions can be obtained out of all others can be manufactured . The process depends upon : describe a process by the help of which , given the atomic propositions , is somewhat less complicated than it sounds . The symbol is intended to truth-function and also the general form of proposition . What is meant any of the originals—and so on indefinitely . This is , he says , the general ing any selection of the set of propositions now obtained , together with taking any selection of atomic propositions , negating them all , then tak- The whole symbol p , ξ , N ξ ) means whatever can be obtained by tions making up ξ . N ( ξ ) stands for the negation of all the proposi- ξstands for any set of propositions . pstands for all atomic propositions . following is the explanation of this symbol : quite fully given in the text . The symbol he uses is p , ξ , N ( ξ ) . The Mr Wittgenstein’s explanation of his symbolism at this point is not INTRODUCTION 14 To say “xis an object” is to say nothing . It follows from this that we think , rightly . This amounts to saying that “object” is a pseudo-concept . suggested is equally fallacious : so , at least , Wittgenstein contends and , I tality of things , and it will be found that any other method that may be The rejection of identity removes one method of speaking of the to- is easy to provide on Wittgenstein’s system . “The even prime is the next number after 1 . ” For such uses of identity it propositions as “Socrates is the philosopher who drank the hemlock , ” or and a description or between two descriptions . It is needed for such mean different things . In practice , identity is needed as between a name banishes identity and adopts the convention that different letters are to not be admitted into the structure of logic . Mr Wittgenstein accordingly characteristic , and accidental characteristics of the world must , of course , that is an accidental characteristic of the world , not a logically necessary to have exactly the same properties . If this does not in fact happen property of y , but it would , after all , be logically possible for two things According to this principle xis identical with yif every property of xis a identity of indiscernibles appears to be not a logically necessary principle . identity by means of the identity of indiscernibles is rejected , because the destructive criticism from which there seems no escape . The definition of identity , but the conception of identity is subjected by Wittgenstein to a a logical necessity . It has been sought to find such a property in self- have to know of some property which must belong to every thing by what there is in the world . In order to be able to do this we should totality of things that can be named , in other words , the totality of is no way whatever , according to him , by which we can describe the not give two names to one thing , or one name to two things . There theoretical logical language , names are only given to simples . We do Let us now take up another subject—that of names . In Wittgenstein’s because another happens . since there is no compulsion according to which one thing must happen to-morrow is a hypothesis . We do not in fact know whether it will rise , Superstition is the belief in the causal nexus . ” That the sun will rise of the future , ” he says , “cannot be inferred from those of the present . Wittgenstein’s logic , be any such thing as a causal nexus . “The events has interesting applications , for example , to causality . There cannot , in The fact that nothing can be deduced from an atomic proposition “por not p . ” propositions of logic , he maintains , are tautologies , such , for example , as INTRODUCTION 15 the world as if it could contemplate these boundaries from the other side case , since it would require that logic should go beyond the boundaries of presuppose that we exclude certain possibilities , and this cannot be the is this and this in the world , but not that , for to say so would apparently the world are also its boundaries . In logic , therefore , we cannot say , there discussion of Solipsism . Logic , he says , fills the world . The boundaries of nothing outside it . These considerations lead him to a somewhat curious ner our logical world has no logical boundary because our logic knows of visual boundary , just because there is nothing outside it , and in like man- an analogy , the field of vision . Our field of vision does not , for us , have a have a boundary , since it has nothing outside it . Wittgenstein uses , as can survey it from above , but for us , however finite it may be , it cannot whole world . Our world may be bounded for some superior being who could get outside the world , if , that is to say , it ceased to be for us the to this view we could only say things about the world as a whole if we tion I am concerned to expound it , not to pronounce upon it . According ultimately true I do not , for my part , profess to know . In this Introduc- suggested , is seen to have much else to recommend it . Whether it is within the world as opposed to the world as a whole , yet the view , once have first suggested to Mr Wittgenstein the limitation of logic to things notation would be a substitute for thought . But although notation may irregularities are often the first sign of philosophical errors , and a perfect ness which at times make it seem almost like a live teacher . Notational is much in its favour , for a good notation has a subtlety and suggestive- This view may have been originally suggested by notation , and if so , that that whatever can be said has to be about bounded portions of the world . that it is impossible to say anything about the world as a whole , and We here touch one instance of Wittgenstein’s fundamental thesis , to be meaningless . word “object” becomes impossible , and the proposition is therefore seen are more than three objects , ” this substitution of the variable for the the second the function “xis red . ” But when we attempt to say “there being one which satisfies in the first case the function “xis human” ; in object can be replaced by a variable in the language of logic , the variable more than three objects which are red , ” for in these statements the word say “there are more than three objects which are human , ” or “there are can only be mentioned in connexion with some definite property . We can world , ” or “there are an infinite number of objects in the world . ” Objects cannot make such statements as “there are more than three objects in the INTRODUCTION 16 through his mind , or a set of incipient bodily movements . It may be man says over to himself , or a complex image , or train of images passing considered as a fact on its own account , may be a set of words which a the sense in which they are facts on their own account . A proposition , analysis , since persons are fictions and so are propositions , except in a person and a proposition . This cannot , of course , be the ultimate which makes it appear as though we were dealing with a relation between to express the phenomenon in the form “A doubts p , ” “A desires p , ” etc . , doubting , considering , desiring , etc . In all these cases it seems natural other mental phenomena which may be called propositional attitudes : Of course , the problem applies not only to belief , but also to a host of i . e . what is the schema representing what occurs when a man believes . 7 . The problem at issue is the problem of the logical form of belief , Philosophical Essays and Proceedings of the Aristotelian Society , 1906– will be found in my articles on the nature of truth and falsehood in with which he is concerned . The theory with which he is disagreeing not likely to be clear to those who have not in mind the controversies What Mr Wittgenstein says here is said so shortly that its point is of a co-ordination of their objects” 5 . 542 ) . ordination of a fact and an object , but a co-ordination of facts by means thinks p , ’ ‘A says p’ are of the form ‘psays p’ ; and here we have no co- relation to the object A . “But it is clear that ‘A believes that p , ’ ‘A p . ” Here it seems superficially as if the proposition pstood in a sort of it seems as if a proposition could also occur in other ways , e . g . “A believes only as bases of truth-operations . ” At first sight , he goes on to explain , “In the general propositional form , propositions occur in a proposition namely , that all molecular functions are truth-functions . He says 5 . 54 ) : Wittgenstein introduces this subject in the statement of his position , tain , such , for example , as “A believes p . ” are at first sight not truth-functions , of the propositions that they con- We must take up next the question of molecular propositions which of the world . The metaphysical subject does not belong to the world but is a boundary the only language I understand ) indicate the boundaries of my world . world is my world appears in the fact that the boundaries of language quite correct , but this cannot be said , it can only be shown . That the This , he says , gives the key to Solipsism . What Solipsism intends is say what we cannot think . also . What we cannot think we cannot think , therefore we also cannot INTRODUCTION 17 only capable of dealing with finite numbers . No logic can be considered plies in particular to his theory of number 6 . 02 ff . which , as it stands , is stein’s theory stands in need of greater technical development . This ap- There are some respects , in which , as it seems to me , Mr Wittgen- same sense in which it occurs in a truth-function . of their constituents . Thus the proposition does not occur at all in the true or false , and that this relation of two facts is reducible to a relation relation of a proposition considered as a fact , to the fact which makes it is that in believing , desiring , etc . , what is logically fundamental is the a statement , however , must not be taken too literally . The real point considering the proposition occurs as a fact , not as a proposition . Such view which I am trying to indicate , to say that in the cases we have been meaning of a proposition . It would perhaps help to suggest the point of does not really enter into what has to be explained in explaining the meanings of the separate words . Accordingly , the proposition as a whole meaning of the series of words which is a proposition is a function of the of a proposition results from the meaning of its constituent words . The relation between these two facts is not unanalysable , since the meaning words is a fact just as much as what makes it true or false is a fact . The believer and the fact which makes these words true or false . The series of two facts , namely , the relation between the series of words used by the in the analysis of belief . This problem is simply one of a relation of propositions is the only non-psychological portion of the problem involved the question of the meaning of propositions , that is to say , the meaning of fact which makes the proposition true or false . This reduces ultimately to proposition considered as a fact on its own account , and the “objective” has to be explained is the relation between the set of words which is the does not have to be assumed in order to explain what is happening . What believes a proposition , the person , considered as a metaphysical subject , problem of belief is the logical schema . It is clear that , when a person however , does not concern the logician . What does concern him in this intention , or association , or what-not . The psychological part of meaning , of a logical relation alone , but in virtue also of a psychological relation of more is relevant ; for a symbol does not mean what it symbolizes in virtue mean the fact which the proposition asserts . To psychology , of course , common element among all these facts , which enables him , as we say , to to himself , is not relevant to logic . What is relevant to logic is that own account , for example the actual set of words the man pronounces any one of innumerable different things . The proposition as a fact on its INTRODUCTION 18 But the totality of possible values of xwhich might seem to be involved logic which can be expressed , according to Mr Wittgenstein’s system . where fx is a given propositional function . This belongs to the part of of generality it is necessary to consider all propositions of the form fx are peculiarly acute . I mean the problem of generality . In the theory There is one purely logical problem in regard to which these difficulties of intellectual discomfort . quate , but , for my part , I confess that it leaves me with a certain sense shown , although it cannot be said . It may be that this defence is ade- opinions . His defence would be that what he calls the mystical can be expressible region . Nevertheless he is capable of conveying his ethical ethics , for example , is placed by Mr Wittgenstein in the mystical , in- a hierarchy of languages , or by some other exit . The whole subject of the sceptical reader that possibly there may be some loophole through ages to say a good deal about what cannot be said , thus suggesting to What causes hesitation is the fact that , after all , Mr Wittgenstein man- in spite of the very powerful arguments which he brings to its support . this that causes some hesitation in accepting Mr Wittgenstein’s position , not to be deterred by that fear , if it is the only right method . It is not might befall a man who attempted this method of teaching , but we are made them , that they are meaningless . It is true that the fate of Socrates philosophical assertions to the learner , and proving to him , whenever he of the sciences , stated with all possible clearness and exactness , leaving teaching philosophy , he says , would be to confine oneself to propositions Wittgenstein , the whole of logic and philosophy . The right method of in a perfectly precise sense . This inexpressible contains , according to Mr incapable of being expressed in language , and is , therefore , inexpressible volved in the very idea of the expressiveness of language must remain as of the facts to which they refer . Everything , therefore , which is in- cannot itself be put into words , since it is a structure of words , as well which makes it capable of being a picture of the fact , but the structure common with the fact a certain structure . It is this common structure logical proposition is a picture true or false ) of the fact , and has in grows naturally out of his doctrine in pure logic , according to which the Wittgenstein’s attitude towards the mystical . His attitude upon this More interesting than such questions of comparative detail is Mr to make it impossible for him to fill this lacuna . numbers . I do not think there is anything in Mr Wittgenstein’s system adequate until it has been shown to be capable of dealing with transfinite INTRODUCTION 19 May 1922 . Bertrand Russell . which no serious philosopher can afford to neglect . in my opinion , belongs to Mr Wittgenstein’s book , and makes it one achieved a work of extraordinary difficulty and importance . This merit , a theory of logic which is not at any point obviously wrong is to have I cannot see any point on which it is wrong . But to have constructed unable to be sure of the rightness of a theory , merely on the ground that and of the deceptiveness of theories which seem irrefutable , I find myself most stress . As one with a long experience of the difficulties of logic though possibly not the part upon which he himself would wish to lay would leave untouched a very large part of Mr Wittgenstein’s theory , clusions . Even if this very difficult hypothesis should prove tenable , it see how any easier hypothesis can escape from Mr Wittgenstein’s con- to it which at the moment I do not know how to answer . Yet I do not abolished . Such an hypothesis is very difficult , and I can see objections delusion , and in this way the supposed sphere of the mystical would be archy would be not merely logically inexpressible , but a fiction , a mere subject-matter of his mysticism . The totality resulting from our hier- to speak logically are nevertheless thought by him to exist , and are the totalities concerning which Mr Wittgenstein holds that it is impossible The only retort would be to deny that there is any such totality . The whole theory is applicable unchanged to the totality of such languages . there may be no limit . Mr Wittgenstein would of course reply that his having itself a new structure , and that to this hierarchy of languages another language dealing with the structure of the first language , and ing which , in the language , nothing can be said , but that there may be that every language has , as Mr Wittgenstein says , a structure concern- These difficulties suggest to my mind some such possibility as this : for example , that there are more than three . can make propositions as to how many things there are in the world , as 6 . 45 ) . This is expressly argued when Mr Wittgenstein denies that we whole is the mystical” ; hence the totality of the values of xis mystical to conceive the world as a whole ; “the feeling of the world as a bounded than the totality of things in the world , and thus involves the attempt Wittgenstein among the things that can be spoken of , for this is no other in the totality of propositions of the form fx is not admitted by Mr INTRODUCTION Kürnberger . und brausen gehört hat , lässt sich in drei Worten sagen . M o t t o : und alles , was man weiss , nicht bloss rauschen DAVID H . PINSENT TO THE MEMORY OF MY FRIEND DEDICATED Tractatus Logico-Philosophicus 23 come and do it better . because my powers are insufficient to cope with the task . —May others Here I am conscious that I have fallen far short of the possible . Simply thoughts are expressed . The more the nail has been hit on the head . — thoughts are expressed , and this value will be the greater the better the If this work has a value it consists in two things . First that in it my thoughts . of my friend Bertrand Russell I owe in large measure the stimulation of I will only mention that to the great works of Frege and the writings by another . to me whether what I have thought has already been thought before me points of detail ; and therefore I give no sources , because it is indifferent decide . Indeed what I have here written makes no claim to novelty in How far my efforts agree with those of other philosophers I will not the other side of the limit will be simply nonsense . The limit can , therefore , only be drawn in language and what lies on we should therefore have to be able to think what cannot be thought ) . to thinking we should have to be able to think both sides of this limit thinking , but to the expression of thoughts ; for , in order to draw a limit The book will , therefore , draw a limit to thinking , or rather—not to clearly ; and whereof one cannot speak thereof one must be silent . summed up somewhat as follows : What can be said at all can be said understanding of the logic of our language . Its whole meaning could be believe , that the method of formulating these problems rests on the mis- The book deals with the problems of philosophy and shows , as I afforded pleasure . if there were one person who read it with understanding and to whom it thoughts . It is therefore not a text-book . Its object would be attained selves already thought the thoughts which are expressed in it—or similar This book will perhaps only be understood by those who have them- PREFACE Tractatus Logico-Philosophicus 24 shows how little has been done when these problems have been solved . in this , then the value of this work secondly consists in the fact that it problems have in essentials been finally solved . And if I am not mistaken to me unassailable and definitive . I am , therefore , of the opinion that the On the other hand the truth of the thoughts communicated here seems 25 n . m1 , n . m2 , etc . , are comments on the proposition No . n . m ; and so on . propositions n . 1 , n . 2 , n . 3 , etc . , are comments on proposition No . n ; the propositions importance of the propositions , the emphasis laid upon them in my exposition . The ∗The decimal figures as numbers of the separate propositions indicate the logical ready lie in them . If things can occur in atomic facts , this possibility must al- of affairs could be made to fit . that could exist alone on its own account , subsequently a state 2 . 0121 It would , so to speak , appear as an accident , when to a thing in the thing . fact the possibility of that atomic fact must already be prejudged 2 . 012 In logic nothing is accidental : if a thing can occur in an atomic atomic fact . 2 . 011 It is essential to a thing that it can be a constituent part of an 2 . 01 An atomic fact is a combination of objects entities , things ) . 2 What is the case , the fact , is the existence of atomic facts . else remain the same . 1 . 21 Any one can either be the case or not be the case , and everything 1 . 2 The world divides into facts . 1 . 13 The facts in logical space are the world . also all that is not the case . 1 . 12 For the totality of facts determines both what is the case , and facts . 1 . 11 The world is determined by the facts , and by these being all the 1 . 1 The world is the totality of facts , not of things . 1 The world is everything that is the case . ∗ 26 2 . 0201 Every statement about complexes can be analysed into a state- 2 . 02 The object is simple . the object . 2 . 0141 The possibility of its occurrence in atomic facts is the form of 2 . 014 Objects contain the possibility of all states of affairs . have apitch , the object of the sense of touch ahardness , etc . colour ; it has , so to speak , a colour space round it . A tone must A speck in a visual field need not be red , but it must have a a place for an argument . 2 . 0131 A spatial object must lie in infinite space . A point in space is the space . can think of this space as empty , but not of the thing without 2 . 013 Every thing is , as it were , in a space of possible atomic facts . I also given . 2 . 0124 If all objects are given , then thereby are all possible atomic facts its internal qualities . 2 . 01231 In order to know an object , I must know not its external but all A new possibility cannot subsequently be found . Every such possibility must lie in the nature of the object . occurrence in atomic facts . 2 . 0123 If I know an object , then I also know all the possibilities of its in the proposition . impossible for words to occur in two different ways , alone and connexion with the atomic fact , a form of dependence . It is sible circumstances , but this form of independence is a form of 2 . 0122 The thing is independent , in so far as it can occur in all pos- I cannot think of it apart from the possibility of this context . If I can think of an object in the context of an atomic fact , other things . of any object apart from the possibility of its connexion with space , or temporal objects apart from time , so we cannot think Just as we cannot think of spatial objects at all apart from every possibility , and all possibilities are its facts . A logical entity cannot be merely possible . Logic treats of TRACTATUS LOGICO-PHILOSOPHICUS 27 changing , the variable . 2 . 0271 The object is the fixed , the existent ; the configuration is the 2 . 027 The fixed , the existent and the object are one . 2 . 026 Only if there are objects can there be a fixed form of the world . 2 . 0251 Space , time and colour colouredness ) are forms of objects . 2 . 025 It is form and content . 2 . 024 Substance is what exists independently of what is the case . tinguish it—for otherwise it would be distinguished . For if a thing is not distinguished by anything , I cannot dis- it is quite impossible to point to any one of them . which have the totality of their properties in common , and then and refer to it ; or , on the other hand , there are several things can distinguish it straight away from the others by a description 2 . 02331 Either a thing has properties which no other has , and then one they are different . ternal properties—only differentiated from one another in that 2 . 0233 Two objects of the same logical form are—apart from their ex- 2 . 0232 Roughly speaking : objects are colourless . propositions—first formed by the configuration of the objects . any material properties . For these are first presented by the 2 . 0231 The substance of the world can only determine a form and not 2 . 023 This fixed form consists of the objects . with the real world . world may be , it must have something—a form—in common 2 . 022 It is clear that however different from the real one an imagined or false ) . 2 . 0212 It would then be impossible to form a picture of the world true sense would depend on whether another proposition was true . 2 . 0211 If the world had no substance , then whether a proposition had be compound . 2 . 021 Objects form the substance of the world . Therefore they cannot which completely describe the complexes . ment about their constituent parts , and into those propositions TRACTATUS LOGICO-PHILOSOPHICUS 28 with one another . in a definite way , represents that the things are so combined 2 . 15 That the elements of the picture are combined with one another 2 . 141 The picture is a fact . with one another in a definite way . 2 . 14 The picture consists in the fact that its elements are combined 2 . 131 The elements of the picture stand , in the picture , for the objects . picture . 2 . 13 To the objects correspond in the picture the elements of the 2 . 12 The picture is a model of reality . non-existence of atomic facts . 2 . 11 The picture presents the facts in logical space , the existence and 2 . 1 We make to ourselves pictures of facts . 2 . 063 The total reality is the world . infer the existence or non-existence of another . 2 . 062 From the existence or non-existence of an atomic fact we cannot 2 . 061 Atomic facts are independent of one another . their non-existence a negative fact . The existence of atomic facts we also call a positive fact , 2 . 06 The existence and non-existence of atomic facts is the reality . ic facts do not exist . 2 . 05 The totality of existent atomic facts also determines which atom- 2 . 04 The totality of existent atomic facts is the world . facts . 2 . 034 The structure of the fact consists of the structures of the atomic 2 . 033 The form is the possibility of the structure . the structure of the atomic fact . 2 . 032 The way in which objects hang together in the atomic fact is 2 . 031 In the atomic fact the objects are combined in a definite way . of a chain . 2 . 03 In the atomic fact objects hang one in another , like the members 2 . 0272 The configuration of the objects forms the atomic fact . TRACTATUS LOGICO-PHILOSOPHICUS 29 2 . 18 What every picture , of whatever form , must have in common sentation . 2 . 174 But the picture cannot place itself outside of its form of repre- object rightly or falsely . its form of representation ) , therefore the picture represents its 2 . 173 The picture represents its object from without its standpoint is tion ; it shows it forth . 2 . 172 The picture , however , cannot represent its form of representa- thing coloured , etc . The spatial picture , everything spatial , the coloured , every- 2 . 171 The picture can represent every reality whose form it has . form of representation . be able to represent it after its manner—rightly or falsely—is its 2 . 17 What the picture must have in common with reality in order to cal in order that the one can be a picture of the other at all . 2 . 161 In the picture and the pictured there must be something identi- with what it pictures . 2 . 16 In order to be a picture a fact must have something in common with which the picture touches reality . 2 . 1515 These co-ordinations are as it were the feelers of its elements elements of the picture and the things . 2 . 1514 The representing relation consists of the co-ordinations of the a picture , also belongs to the picture . 2 . 1513 According to this view the representing relation which makes it to be measured . 2 . 15121 Only the outermost points of the dividing lines touch the object 2 . 1512 It is like a scale applied to reality . 2 . 1511 Thus the picture is linked with reality ; it reaches up to it . combined with one another as are the elements of the picture . 2 . 151 The form of representation is the possibility that the things are of representation of the picture . structure , and the possibility of this structure is called the form This connexion of the elements of the picture is called its TRACTATUS LOGICO-PHILOSOPHICUS 30 What is thinkable is also possible . it thinks . 3 . 02 The thought contains the possibility of the state of affairs which 3 . 01 The totality of true thoughts is a picture of the world . 3 . 001 “An atomic fact is thinkable”—means : we can imagine it . 3 The logical picture of the facts is the thought . 2 . 225 There is no picture which is a priori true . or false . 2 . 224 It cannot be discovered from the picture alone whether it is true compare it with reality . 2 . 223 In order to discover whether the picture is true or false we must truth or falsity consists . 2 . 222 In the agreement or disagreement of its sense with reality , its 2 . 221 What the picture represents is its sense . truth or falsehood , through the form of representation . 2 . 22 The picture represents what it represents , independently of its or false . 2 . 21 The picture agrees with reality or not ; it is right or wrong , true it represents . 2 . 203 The picture contains the possibility of the state of affairs which 2 . 202 The picture represents a possible state of affairs in logical space . existence and non-existence of atomic facts . 2 . 201 The picture depicts reality by representing a possibility of the with what it pictures . 2 . 2 The picture has the logical form of representation in common 2 . 19 The logical picture can depict the world . example , not every picture is spatial . 2 . 182 Every picture is also a logical picture . On the other hand , for is called a logical picture . 2 . 181 If the form of representation is the logical form , then the picture falsely—is the logical form , that is , the form of reality . with reality in order to be able to represent it at all—rightly or TRACTATUS LOGICO-PHILOSOPHICUS 31 its content . In the proposition the form of its sense is contained , but not significant proposition . “The content of the proposition” means the content of the but the possibility of expressing it . In the proposition , therefore , its sense is not yet contained , itself . Therefore the possibility of what is projected but not this jection ; but not what is projected . 3 . 13 To the proposition belongs everything which belongs to the pro- its projective relation to the world . ositional sign . And the proposition is the propositional sign in 3 . 12 The sign through which we express the thought I call the prop- proposition . The method of projection is the thinking of the sense of the of the proposition as a projection of the possible state of affairs . 3 . 11 We use the sensibly perceptible sign sound or written sign , etc . the senses . 3 . 1 In the proposition the thought is expressed perceptibly through of comparison ) . was to be recognized from the thought itself without an object 3 . 05 We could only know a priori that a thought is true if its truth anteed its truth . 3 . 04 An a priori true thought would be one whose possibility guar- geometry . the laws of physics , but not one which contradicted the laws of 3 . 0321 We could present spatially an atomic fact which contradicted of a point which does not exist . which contradicts the laws of space ; or to give the co-ordinates impossible as in geometry to present by its co-ordinates a figure 3 . 032 To present in language anything which “contradicts logic” is as of an “unlogical” world how it would look . was contrary to the laws of logic . The truth is , we could not say 3 . 031 It used to be said that God could create everything , except what have to think unlogically . 3 . 03 We cannot think anything unlogical , for otherwise we should TRACTATUS LOGICO-PHILOSOPHICUS 32 affairs . sign corresponds the configuration of the objects in the state of 3 . 21 To the configuration of the simple signs in the propositional the same sign as “A” . 3 . 203 The name means the object . The object is its meaning . “A” is 3 . 202 The simple signs employed in propositions are called names . pletely analysed” . 3 . 201 These elements I call “simple signs” and the proposition “com- sign . of the thoughts correspond the elements of the propositional 3 . 2 In propositions thoughts can be so expressed that to the objects have sense . Names resemble points ; propositions resemble arrows , they 3 . 144 States of affairs can be described but not named . relation to ‘b’ says that aRb” . relation Rto b’” ; but we must say , “That ‘a’ stands in a certain 3 . 1432 We must not say , “The complex sign ‘aRb’ says ‘astands in the sense of the proposition . The mutual spatial position of these things then expresses chairs , books ) instead of written signs . when we imagine it made up of spatial objects such as tables , 3 . 1431 The essential nature of the propositional sign becomes very clear pounded name . Thus it was possible for Frege to call the proposition a com- proposition does not appear essentially different from a word . For in the printed proposition , for example , the sign of a form of expression , written or printed . 3 . 143 That the propositional sign is a fact is concealed by the ordinary 3 . 142 Only facts can express a sense , a class of names cannot . The proposition is articulate . theme is not a mixture of tones ) . 3 . 141 The proposition is not a mixture of words just as the musical The propositional sign is a fact . words , are combined in it in a definite way . 3 . 14 The propositional sign consists in the fact that its elements , the TRACTATUS LOGICO-PHILOSOPHICUS 33 ings of these signs are already known . signs . They can , therefore , only be understood when the mean- tions . Elucidations are propositions which contain the primitive 3 . 263 The meanings of primitive signs can be explained by elucida- cation . What the signs conceal , their application declares . 3 . 262 What does not get expressed in the sign is shown by its appli- has a meaning ) . pieces by definition nor any sign which alone and independently signs , cannot signify in the same way . Names cannot be taken to Two signs , one a primitive sign , and one defined by primitive and the definitions show the way . 3 . 261 Every defined sign signifies via those signs by which it is defined , primitive sign . 3 . 26 The name cannot be analysed further by any definition . It is a clearly specifiable way : the proposition is articulate . 3 . 251 The proposition expresses what it expresses in a definite and 3 . 25 There is one and only one complete analysis of the proposition . symbol can be expressed by a definition . The combination of the symbols of a complex in a simple proposition . The notation for generality contains a prototype . curs . We know that everything is not yet determined by this from an indeterminateness in the propositions in which it oc- That a propositional element signifies a complex can be seen nonsense but simply false . is mention of a complex , if this does not exist , becomes not will either be right or wrong . The proposition in which there A complex can only be given by its description , and this proposition about its constituent part . 3 . 24 A proposition about a complex stands in internal relation to the late of the determinateness of the sense . 3 . 23 The postulate of the possibility of the simple signs is the postu- a thing is , not what it is . of them . I cannot assert them . A proposition can only say how 3 . 221 Objects I can only name . Signs represent them . I can only speak 3 . 22 In the proposition the name represents the object . TRACTATUS LOGICO-PHILOSOPHICUS 34 mined . 3 . 316 What values the propositional variable can assume is deter- to a logical form , to a logical prototype . it depends only on the nature of the proposition . It corresponds a class . But this is now no longer dependent on any agreement ; bitrarily determined , into variables , there always remains such osition . But if we change all those signs , whose meaning was ar- on what , by arbitrary agreement , we mean by parts of that prop- sulting variable proposition . This class in general still depends there is a class of propositions which are all the values of the re- 3 . 315 If we change a constituent part of a proposition into a variable , Including the variable name . can be conceived as a propositional variable . 3 . 314 An expression has meaning only in a proposition . Every variable I call such a variable a “propositional variable” . pression a proposition . In the limiting case the variables become constants , the ex- the propositions which contain the expression . 3 . 313 An expression is thus presented by a variable , whose values are else variable . And in this form the expression is constant and everything which it characterizes . 3 . 312 It is therefore represented by the general form of the propositions propositions . it can occur . It is the common characteristic mark of a class of 3 . 311 An expression presupposes the forms of all propositions in which An expression characterizes a form and a content . another . proposition—that propositions can have in common with one Expressions are everything—essential for the sense of the The proposition itself is an expression . an expression a symbol ) . 3 . 31 Every part of a proposition which characterizes its sense I call sition has a name meaning . 3 . 3 Only the proposition has sense ; only in the context of a propo- TRACTATUS LOGICO-PHILOSOPHICUS 35 merely different meanings but they are different symbols . a proper name and the last an adjective—these words have not In the proposition “Green is green”—where the first word is of something but also of the fact of something happening . intransitive verb like “to go” ; “identical” as an adjective ; we speak equality , and as the expression of existence ; “to exist” as an Thus the word “is” appears as the copula , as the sign of proposition . different ways , are apparently applied in the same way in the to two different symbols—or that two words , which signify in same word signifies in two different ways—and therefore belongs 3 . 323 In the language of everyday life it very often happens that the would be what was common in the symbolization . therefore equally well choose two different signs and where then methods of symbolizing . For the sign is arbitrary . We could that we symbolize them with the same signs but by different 3 . 322 It can never indicate the common characteristic of two objects ways . sign or the sound sign ) in common—they then signify in different 3 . 321 Two different symbols can therefore have the sign the written 3 . 32 The sign is the part of the symbol perceptible by the senses . of the expressions contained in it . 3 . 318 I conceive the proposition—like Frege and Russell—as a function tial . The way in which we describe the propositions is not essen- symbolized . only a description of symbols and asserts nothing about what is And only this is essential to the determination , that it is with their meaning . The determination will therefore deal only with symbols not The determination is a description of these propositions . variable is . is done by indicating the propositions whose common mark the 3 . 317 The determination of the values of the propositional variable The determination of the values is the variable . TRACTATUS LOGICO-PHILOSOPHICUS 36 the form φ ( fx ) , the outer the form φ ( fx ) . Common to function Fmust have different meanings ; for the inner has “F ( F ( fx ) ” , and in this the outer function Fand the inner be its own argument , then there would be a proposition If , for example , we suppose that the function F ( f x ) could cannot contain itself . sign already contains the prototype of its own argument and it 3 . 333 A function cannot be its own argument , because the functional theory of types” ) . ositional sign cannot be contained in itself that is the “whole 3 . 332 No proposition can say anything about itself , because the prop- up his symbolic rules he has to speak of the meaning of the signs . ory of Types . Russell’s error is shown by the fact that in drawing 3 . 331 From this observation we get a further view—into Russell’s The- only the description of the expressions . thereby made of the meaning of a sign ; it ought to presuppose rôle ; it must admit of being established without mention being 3 . 33 In logical syntax the meaning of a sign ought never to play a meaning , then it has meaning . If everything in the symbolism works as though a sign had meaning of Occam’s razor . 3 . 328 If a sign is not necessary then it is meaningless . That is the syntactic application . 3 . 327 The sign determines a logical form only together with its logical the significant use . 3 . 326 In order to recognize the symbol in the sign we must consider guage , which , however , does still not exclude all errors . The logical symbolism of Frege and Russell is such a lan- rules of logical grammar—of logical syntax . in different ways . A symbolism , that is to say , which obeys the symbols and by not applying signs in the same way which signify which excludes them , by not applying the same sign in different 3 . 325 In order to avoid these errors , we must employ a symbolism which the whole of philosophy is full ) . 3 . 324 Thus there easily arise the most fundamental confusions of TRACTATUS LOGICO-PHILOSOPHICUS 37 common . every other according to such rules . It is this which all have in another . Every correct symbolism must be translatable into 3 . 343 Definitions are rules for the translation of one language into the world . ity of every single thing reveals something about the nature of proves over and over again to be unimportant , but the possibil- ing . And this happens as a rule in philosophy : The single thing is always important that this is a possible method of symboliz- 3 . 3421 A particular method of symbolizing may be unimportant , but it from the essence of the notation . arbitrarily , then something else must be the case . This results is not arbitrary , namely that if we have determined anything 3 . 342 In our notations there is indeed something arbitrary , but this name . step by step , that no sort of composition was essential for a which signify an object , have in common . It would then follow , 3 . 3411 One could therefore say the real name is that which all symbols , in common . that which all symbols which can fulfil the same purpose have And in the same way in general the essential in a symbol is to all propositions which can express the same sense . 3 . 341 The essential in a proposition is therefore that which is common alone enable the proposition to express its sense . of producing the propositional sign . Essential are those which Accidental are the features which are due to a particular way 3 . 34 A proposition possesses essential and accidental features . know how every single sign signifies . 3 . 334 The rules of logical syntax must follow of themselves , if we only Herewith Russell’s paradox vanishes . F ( φu ) . φu =F u” . This is at once clear , if instead of “F ( F ( u ) ” we write “ ( ∃φ ) nothing . both functions is only the letter “F” , which by itself signifies TRACTATUS LOGICO-PHILOSOPHICUS 38 the single sounds are produced . what each word means—just as one speaks without knowing how every sense can be expressed , without having an idea how and 4 . 002 Man possesses the capacity of constructing languages , in which 4 . 001 The totality of propositions is the language . 4 The thought is the significant proposition . 3 . 5 The applied , thought , propositional sign is the thought . space . ical space . The proposition reaches through the whole logical The logical scaffolding round the picture determines the log- would always introduce new elements—in co-ordination . Otherwise denial , the logical sum , the logical product , etc . , space , the whole logical space must already be given by it . 3 . 42 Although a proposition may only determine one place in logical possibility of an existence . 3 . 411 The geometrical and the logical place agree in that each is the logical place . 3 . 41 The propositional sign and the logical co-ordinates : that is the osition . constituent parts alone , by the existence of the significant prop- tence of this logical place is guaranteed by the existence of the 3 . 4 The proposition determines a place in logical space : the exis- propositional structure . in such a way that its resolution would be different in every 3 . 3442 The sign of the complex is not arbitrarily resolved in the analysis , notation can give us general information . Herewith is indicated the way in which a special possible “not p” ) and “p∨q” “por q” ) . they all , for example , can be replaced by the notations of “∼p” for the truth-functions as follows : It is common to them that 3 . 3441 We can , for example , express what is common to all notations logical syntax . symbols by which it can be replaced according to the rules of 3 . 344 What signifies in the symbol is what is common to all those TRACTATUS LOGICO-PHILOSOPHICUS 39 4 . 013 And if we penetrate to the essence of this pictorial nature we a picture . Here the sign is obviously a likeness of the signified . 4 . 012 It is obvious that we perceive a proposition of the form aRb as sense of the word—of what they represent . these symbolisms prove to be pictures—even in the ordinary letters ) seem to be a picture of our spoken language . And yet be a picture of a musical piece ; nor does our phonetic spelling treats . But nor does the musical score appear at first sight to paper—does not seem to be a picture of the reality of which it 4 . 011 At the first glance the proposition—say as it stands printed on The proposition is a model of the reality as we think it is . 4 . 01 The proposition is a picture of reality . logical form of the proposition need not be its real form . ner’s sense ) . Russell’s merit is to have shown that the apparent 4 . 0031 All philosophy is “Critique of language” but not at all in Mauth- are really no problems . And so it is not to be wondered at that the deepest problems is more or less identical than the Beautiful . They are of the same kind as the question whether the Good the logic of our language . the philosophers result from the fact that we do not understand state their senselessness . Most questions and propositions of not , therefore , answer questions of this kind at all , but only philosophical matters , are not false , but senseless . We can- 4 . 003 Most propositions and questions , that have been written about enormously complicated . The silent adjustments to understand colloquial language are recognized . with quite another object than to let the form of the body be clothe , because the external form of the clothes is constructed form of the clothes one cannot infer the form of the thought they Language disguises the thought ; so that from the external logic of language . From it it is humanly impossible to gather immediately the not less complicated than it . Colloquial language is a part of the human organism and is TRACTATUS LOGICO-PHILOSOPHICUS 40 it says , that they do so stand . The proposition shows how things stand , if it is true . And 4 . 022 The proposition shows its sense . plained to me . understand the proposition , without its sense having been ex- affairs presented by it , if I understand the proposition . And I 4 . 021 The proposition is a picture of reality , for I know the state of propositional sign , without having had it explained to us . 4 . 02 This we see from the fact that we understand the sense of the representation being lost . And from it came the alphabet without the essence of the hieroglyphic writing , which pictures the facts it describes . 4 . 016 In order to understand the essence of the proposition , consider rests on the logic of representation . 4 . 015 The possibility of all similes , of all the imagery of our language , the gramophone record . It is the rule of translation of this language into the language of projects the symphony into the language of the musical score . entirely different . And the rule is the law of projection which similarity between these things which at first sight seem to be of the first rule—construct the score , herein lies the internal line on a gramophone record and from this again—by means a rule by which one could reconstruct the symphony from the able to read the symphony out of the score , and that there is 4 . 0141 In the fact that there is a general rule by which the musician is story . They are all in a certain sense one . Like the two youths , their two horses and their lilies in the them the logical structure is common . relation , which holds between language and the world . To all of waves of sound , all stand to one another in that pictorial internal 4 . 014 The gramophone record , the musical thought , the score , the only in another way . For these irregularities also picture what they are to express ; use of and in the score ) . see that this is not disturbed by apparent irregularities like the TRACTATUS LOGICO-PHILOSOPHICUS 41 for the sake of experiment . 4 . 031 In the proposition a state of affairs is , as it were , put together picture . The proposition only asserts something , in so far as it is a And the connexion is , in fact , that it is its logical picture . fore it must be essentially connected with the state of affairs . The proposition communicates to us a state of affairs , there- 4 . 03 A proposition must communicate a new sense with old words . sense to us . 4 . 027 It is essential to propositions , that they can communicate a new By means of propositions we explain ourselves . to us , if we are to understand them . 4 . 026 The meanings of the simple signs the words ) must be explained also adverbs and conjunctions , etc . , and it treats them all alike . And the dictionary does not only translate substantives but translated . the other , but only the constituent parts of propositions are of translating each proposition of the one into a proposition of 4 . 025 The translation of one language into another is not a process One understands it if one understands its constituent parts . it is true or not . One can therefore understand it without knowing whether it is true . 4 . 024 To understand a proposition means to know what is the case , if draw conclusions from a false proposition . all the logical features possessed by reality if it is true . One can scaffolding , and therefore one can actually see in the proposition The proposition constructs a world with the help of a logical erties . properties so propositions describe reality by its internal prop- As the description of an object describes it by its external A proposition is the description of a fact . It must therefore be completely described by the proposition . needs to say “Yes” or “No” to it to make it agree with reality . 4 . 023 The proposition determines reality to this extent , that one only TRACTATUS LOGICO-PHILOSOPHICUS 42 4 . 05 Reality is compared with the proposition . it cannot explain the multiplicity of these relations . tial relations through “spatial spectacles” does not do , because 4 . 0412 For the same reason the idealist explanation of the seeing of spa- have not the necessary mathematical multiplicity . All these ways of symbolizing are inadequate because they determine the identity of the variables , etc . places , like “ ( G , G ) . F G , G ) ” , it would not do—we could not If we were to try it by introducing a mark in the argument know the scope of the generalization . it by an index g , like : “f ( xg ) ” it would not do—we should not we should not know what was generalized . If we tried to show by putting an index before fx , like : “Gen . fx” , it would not do , 4 . 0411 If we tried , for example , to express what is expressed by “ ( x ) . fx” represented . One cannot get outside it in the representation . 4 . 041 This mathematical multiplicity naturally cannot in its turn be multiplicity cf . Hertz’s Mechanics , on Dynamic Models ) . They must both possess the same logical mathematical ) guishable as there are in the state of affairs , which it represents . 4 . 04 In the proposition there must be exactly as many things distin- tion with another stem . gives a different sense with another termination , or its termina- Even the proposition “ambulo” is composite , for its stem as it is logically articulated . 4 . 032 The proposition is a picture of its state of affairs , only in so far not represent . That the logic of the facts cannot be represented . My fundamental thought is that the “logical constants” do representation of objects by signs . 4 . 0312 The possibility of propositions is based upon the principle of the picture , presents the atomic fact . and they are connected together . And so the whole , like a living 4 . 0311 One name stands for one thing , and another for another thing , affairs . a sense , This proposition represents such and such a state of One can say , instead of , This proposition has such and such TRACTATUS LOGICO-PHILOSOPHICUS 43 ing at all , for it signifies no thing truth-value ) whose properties black are ; but to a proposition without a sense corresponds noth- indicate a point on the paper , without knowing what white and The point at which the simile breaks down is this : we can determine the sense of the proposition . determined under what conditions I call “p” true , and thereby I in order to be able to say “p” is true or false ) I must have first know under what conditions a point is called white or black ; But to be able to say that a point is black or white , I must corresponds to the assumption proposed for judgment , etc . etc . a point of the plane a truth-value in Frege’s terminology ) , this that a point is white not black ) , a negative fact . If I indicate fact that a point is black corresponds a positive fact ; to the fact of each point of the plane whether it is white or black . To the white paper ; the form of the spot can be described by saying 4 . 063 An illustration to explain the concept of truth . A black spot on them corresponds one and the same reality . The propositions “p” and “∼p” have opposite senses , but to its sense ∼∼p=p ) . That negation occurs in a proposition , is no characteristic of in reality . important , for it shows that the sign “∼” corresponds to nothing 4 . 0621 That , however , the signs “p” and “∼p”can say the same thing is is true and not false . and what we mean is the case , then “p” in the new conception we assert by means of it is the case ; and if by “p” we mean ∼p , are meant to be false ? No ! For a proposition is true , if what sitions as hitherto with true ones , so long as we know that they 4 . 062 Can we not make ourselves understood by means of false propo- way what “∼p” signifies in the false way , etc . One could then , for example , say that “p” signifies in the true rights . are two relations between signs and things signified with equal pendent of the facts , one can easily believe that true and false 4 . 061 If one does not observe that propositions have a sense inde- reality . 4 . 06 Propositions can be true or false only by being pictures of the TRACTATUS LOGICO-PHILOSOPHICUS 44 of thought processes which philosophers held to be so essential Does not my study of sign-language correspond to the study The theory of knowledge is the philosophy of psychology . natural science . 4 . 1121 Psychology is no nearer related to philosophy , than is any other thoughts which otherwise are , as it were , opaque and blurred . Philosophy should make clear and delimit sharply the propositions” , but to make propositions clear . The result of philosophy is not a number of “philosophical A philosophical work consists essentially of elucidations . Philosophy is not a theory but an activity . 4 . 112 The object of philosophy is the logical clarification of thoughts . above or below , but not beside the natural sciences . The word “philosophy” must mean something which stands 4 . 111 Philosophy is not one of the natural sciences . the totality of the natural sciences ) . 4 . 11 The totality of true propositions is the total natural science or facts . 4 . 1 A proposition presents the existence and non-existence of atomic liminary to a proposition . what is denied is already a proposition and not merely the pre- That one can deny again the denied proposition , shows that it lies outside the latter place . help of the logical place of the proposition denied , by saying that The denying proposition determines a logical place , with the than does the proposition denied . The denying proposition determines a logical place other determined by the proposition that is denied . 4 . 0641 One could say , the denial is already related to the logical place same holds of denial , etc . give it a sense , for what it asserts is the sense itself . And the 4 . 064 Every proposition must already have a sense ; assertion cannot must already contain the verb . true” or “is false”—as Frege thought—but that which “is true” are called “false” or “true” ; the verb of the proposition is not “is TRACTATUS LOGICO-PHILOSOPHICUS 45 right logical conception , if only all is right in our symbolism . 4 . 1213 Now we understand our feeling that we are in possession of the 4 . 1212 What can be shown cannot be said . their structure ; similarly if one follows from another , etc . If two propositions contradict one another , this is shown by the same object . occurs , two propositions “f a” and “ga” that they are both about 4 . 1211 Thus a proposition “fa” shows that in its sense the object a They exhibit it . The propositions show the logical form of reality . by language . That which expresses itself in language , we cannot express resent . That which mirrors itself in language , language cannot rep- in the propositions . 4 . 121 Propositions cannot represent the logical form : this mirrors itself is outside the world . be able to put ourselves with the propositions outside logic , that To be able to represent the logical form , we should have to to be able to represent it—the logical form . represent what they must have in common with reality in order 4 . 12 Propositions can represent the whole reality , but they cannot Everything that can be said can be said clearly . 4 . 116 Everything that can be thought at all can be thought clearly . 4 . 115 It will mean the unspeakable by clearly displaying the speakable . thinkable . It should limit the unthinkable from within through the 4 . 114 It should limit the thinkable and thereby the unthinkable . 4 . 113 Philosophy limits the disputable sphere of natural science . has any other hypothesis of natural science . 4 . 1122 The Darwinian theory has no more to do with philosophy than analogous danger for my method . part in unessential psychological investigations , and there is an to the philosophy of logic ? Only they got entangled for the most TRACTATUS LOGICO-PHILOSOPHICUS 46 external” disappears . 4 . 1251 Here the disputed question “whether all relations are internal or tween the propositions presenting them . affairs expresses itself in language by an internal relation be- 4 . 125 The existence of an internal relation between possible states of there is a sense in asserting either property of either form . one has this property but the other that : for this assumes that 4 . 1241 One cannot distinguish forms from one another by saying that proposition as to deny it the formal property . It would be as senseless to ascribe a formal property to a property of this proposition . proposition which presents that state of affairs , by an internal is not expressed by a proposition , but it expresses itself in the 4 . 124 The existence of an internal property of a possible state of affairs tion” there corresponds the shifting use of the word “object” . Here to the shifting use of the words “property” and “rela- objects should not stand in this relation . brighter and darker eo ipso . It is unthinkable that these two This blue colour and that stand in the internal relation of not possess it . 4 . 123 A property is internal if it is unthinkable that its object does In the sense in which we speak of facial features . 4 . 1221 An internal property of a fact we also call a feature of this fact . objects in question . propositions , which present the atomic facts and treat of the however , be asserted by propositions , but it shows itself in the The holding of such internal properties and relations cannot , internal relations and proper external ) relations . for the confusion , very widespread among philosophers , between I introduce these expressions in order to show the reason erty” ; instead of relation of structures “internal relation” . Instead of property of the structure I also say “internal prop- in the same sense of formal relations and relations of structures . and atomic facts , or of properties of the structure of facts , and 4 . 122 We can speak in a certain sense of formal properties of objects TRACTATUS LOGICO-PHILOSOPHICUS 47 of these values . values possess , and which can be conceived as a formal property For every variable presents a constant form , which all its 4 . 1271 Every variable is the sign of a formal concept . values signify the objects which fall under this concept . 4 . 127 The propositional variable signifies the formal concept , and its stant . tional variable in which only this characteristic feature is con- The expression of the formal concept is therefore a proposi- meanings fall under the concept . cept is , therefore , a characteristic feature of all symbols , whose The sign that signifies the characteristics of a formal con- symbols . The expression of a formal property is a feature of certain pressed by the functions . For their characteristics , the formal properties , are not ex- by a function . Formal concepts cannot , like proper concepts , be presented etc . signifies an object , the numerical sign that it signifies a number , itself in the sign of this object itself . The name shows that it longing to it , cannot be expressed by a proposition . But it shows That anything falls under a formal concept as an object be- the whole of the old logic . sion of formal concepts with proper concepts which runs through I introduce this expression in order to make clear the confu- speak also of formal concepts . 4 . 126 In the sense in which we speak of formal properties we can now of a . If bstands in one of these relations to a , I call ba successor “ ( ∃x , y ) aRx aRy yRb” , etc . “ ( ∃x ) aRx xRb” , Similarly the series of propositions “aRb” , an internal relation . The series of numbers is ordered not by an external , but by 4 . 1252 Series which are ordered by internal relations I call formal series . TRACTATUS LOGICO-PHILOSOPHICUS 48 We can determine the general term of the formal series by cious circle . propositions like the above is , therefore , false ; it contains a vi- and Russell overlooked ; the way in which they express general by “term of this formal series” is a formal concept . This Frege can only be expressed by a variable , for the concept symbolized ∃x , y ) aRx xRy yRb , The general term of a formal series the general term of the formal series : aRb , ∃x ) aRx xRb , sition “bis a successor of a” we need for this an expression for 4 . 1273 If we want to express in logical symbolism the general propo- numbers . tions as primitive ideas ; or the concept of number and definite as Russell does ) the concept of function and also special func- self , as primitive ideas . One cannot , therefore , e . g . introduce which fall under a formal concept and the formal concept it- under it . One cannot , therefore , introduce both , the objects 4 . 12721 The formal concept is already given with an object , which falls to say : 2 + 2 is at 3 o’clock equal to 4 . It is as senseless to say , “there is only one 1” as it would be nought” , and all like them are senseless . Expressions like “1 is a number” , “there is only one number and Russell thought ) . symbolism by variables , not by functions or classes as Frege They all signify formal concepts and are presented in logical “Number” , etc . The same holds of the words “Complex” , “Fact” , “Function” , jects” . And it is senseless to speak of the number of all objects . are books” . Nor “There are 100 objects” or “There are ℵ0ob- So one cannot , e . g . say “There are objects” as one says “There there arise senseless pseudo-propositions . Wherever it is used otherwise , i . e . as a proper concept word , ” , by “ ( ∃x , y ) . ” . For example in the proposition “there are two objects which used , it is expressed in logical symbolism by the variable name . Wherever the word “object” “thing” , “entity” , etc . is rightly object . 4 . 1272 So the variable name “x” is the proper sign of the pseudo-concept TRACTATUS LOGICO-PHILOSOPHICUS 49 Or I indicate it by the letters p , q , r . in the form “fx” , “φ ( x , y ) ” , etc . The elementary proposition I write as function of the names , letters x , y , z ) . 4 . 24 The names are the simple symbols , I indicate them by single elementary proposition . 4 . 23 The name occurs in the proposition only in the context of the be objects and atomic facts . composed of an infinite number of objects , even then there must of an infinite number of atomic facts and every atomic fact is 4 . 2211 Even if the world is infinitely complex , so that every fact consists comes to be . The question arises here , how the propositional connexion combination . to elementary propositions , which consist of names in immediate 4 . 221 It is obvious that in the analysis of propositions we must come a concatenation , of names . 4 . 22 The elementary proposition consists of names . It is a connexion , proposition can contradict it . 4 . 211 It is a sign of an elementary proposition , that no elementary the existence of an atomic fact . 4 . 21 The simplest proposition , the elementary proposition , asserts atomic facts . with the possibilities of the existence and non-existence of the 4 . 2 The sense of a proposition is its agreement and disagreement therefore there is no philosophical monism or dualism , etc . Therefore there are in logic no pre-eminent numbers , and 4 . 128 The logical forms are anumerical . ject-predicate propositions ? ” ) For example , one cannot ask : “Are there unanalysable sub- For no proposition can answer such a question . 4 . 1274 The question about the existence of a formal concept is senseless . generates the following term out of the preceding proposition . giving its first term and the general form of the operation , which TRACTATUS LOGICO-PHILOSOPHICUS 50 4 . 3 The truth-possibilities of the elementary propositions mean the ties of the truth—and falsehood—of nelementary propositions . 4 . 28 To these combinations correspond the same number of possibili- and the others not to exist . It is possible for all combinations of atomic facts to exist , ν=0 νpossibilities . P n n 4 . 27 With regard to the existence of natomic facts there are Kn= which of them are true and which false . specification of all elementary propositions plus the specification , the world completely . The world is completely described by the 4 . 26 The specification of all true elementary propositions describes is false the atomic fact does not exist . 4 . 25 If the elementary proposition is true , the atomic fact exists ; if it signs . This will be shown later . are neither elementary propositions nor otherwise significant Expressions like “a=a” , or expressions deduced from these them into one another . synonymous , it is impossible for me not to be able to translate man word , it is impossible for me not to know that they are If I know the meaning of an English and a synonymous Ger- if they mean the same or different things ? stand a proposition in which two names occur , without knowing signify the same thing or two different things ? Can we under- 4 . 243 Can we understand two names without knowing whether they signs “a” and “b” . in presentation : They assert nothing about the meaning of the 4 . 242 Expressions of the form “a=b” are therefore only expedients definition is a symbolic rule . equation—definition— ( like Russell ) in the form “a=bDef . ” . A that it shall replace a previously known sign “a” , I write the If I introduce by an equation a new sign “b” , by determining sign “b” . “a=b” means then , that the sign “a” is replaceable by the by putting between them the sign “=” . 4 . 241 If I use two signs with one and the same meaning , I express this TRACTATUS LOGICO-PHILOSOPHICUS 51 truth-conditions of the proposition . truth-possibilities of the elementary propositions expresses the 4 . 431 The expression of the agreement and disagreement with the Absence of this mark means disagreement . ordinating with them in the schema the mark “T” true ) . 4 . 43 Agreement with the truth-possibilities can be expressed by co- κ=0 κ=Lnpossibilities . are Kn P Kn with the truth-possibilities of nelementary propositions there 4 . 42 With regard to the agreement and disagreement of a proposition propositions . general propositions depends palpably on that of the elementary the other kinds of propositions . Indeed the comprehension of the elementary propositions is fundamental for the comprehension of 4 . 411 It seems probable even at first sight that the introduction of the conditions of the truth and falsehood of the propositions . 4 . 41 The truth-possibilities of the elementary propositions are the with the truth-possibilities of the elementary propositions . 4 . 4 A proposition is the expression of agreement and disagreement F F F T F F F T F F F T T T F F F T F T T F F T T F T F TTT T T T p q r p q p truth-possibilities in an easily intelligible symbolism ) . F’s under the row of the elementary propositions mean their lowing kind “T” means “true” , “F” “false” . The rows of T’s and 4 . 31 The truth-possibilities can be presented by schemata of the fol- facts . possibilities of the existence and non-existence of the atomic TRACTATUS LOGICO-PHILOSOPHICUS 52 truth-conditions . 4 . 45 For nelementary propositions there are Lnpossible groups of by the number of terms in the right-hand bracket . The number of places in the left-hand bracket is determined or more plainly : “ ( TTFT ) ( p , q ) ” . column as a row the propositional sign becomes : “ ( TT–T ) ( p , q ) ” , is by itself an expression of the truth-conditions . If we write this for all determined by a rule of combination , then the last column If the sequence of the truth-possibilities in the schema is once assert of itself that it is true . the number of the proposition . A proposition cannot possibly “ ` ” belongs therefore to the propositions no more than does true the propositions marked in this way . in Frege and Russell ) it only shows that these authors hold as Frege’s assertion sign “ ` ” is logically altogether meaningless ; is a propositional sign . F F T ” T F F T T T T T “ p q 4 . 442 Thus e . g . press the same as the schemata of “T” and “F” . Something analogous holds of course for all signs , which ex- and vertical lines or to brackets . There are no “logical objects” . or complex of objects ) corresponds ; any more than to horizontal 4 . 441 It is clear that to the complex of the signs “F” and “T” no object with the truth-possibilities is a propositional sign . 4 . 44 The sign which arises from the co-ordination of that mark “T” determination . the sense of ∼pwould by no means be determined by Frege’s false” were real objects and the arguments in ∼p , etc . , then explanation of the truth-concept is false : if “the true” and “the as explaining the signs of his logical symbolism . Only Frege’s Frege has therefore quite rightly put them at the beginning , The proposition is the expression of its truth-conditions . TRACTATUS LOGICO-PHILOSOPHICUS 53 stance , in which a body may be placed . another : in a positive sense , like the space limited by solid sub- sense like a solid body , which restricts the free movement of The proposition , the picture , the model , are in a negative facts by the proposition . 4 . 463 The truth-conditions determine the range , which is left to the in no presenting relation to reality . —the presenting relations—cancel one another , so that it stands In the tautology the conditions of agreement with the world possible state of affairs , the other none . present no possible state of affairs . For the one allows every 4 . 462 Tautology and contradiction are not pictures of the reality . They the symbolism of Arithmetic . are part of the symbolism , in the same way that “0” is part of 4 . 4611 Tautology and contradiction are , however , not senseless ; they it rains or does not rain . I know , e . g . nothing about the weather , when I know that directions . Like the point from which two arrows go out in opposite Tautology and contradiction are without sense . ally true ; and the contradiction is on no condition true . The tautology has no truth-conditions , for it is uncondition- tradiction that they say nothing . 4 . 461 The proposition shows what it says , the tautology and the con- second case a contradiction . In the first case we call the proposition a tautology , in the possibilities . The truth-conditions are self-contradictory . In the second case the proposition is false for all the truth- conditions are tautological . sibilities of the elementary propositions . We say that the truth- In the one case the proposition is true for all the truth-pos- extreme cases . 4 . 46 Among the possible groups of truth-conditions there are two dered in a series . possibilities of a number of elementary propositions can be or- The groups of truth-conditions which belong to the truth- TRACTATUS LOGICO-PHILOSOPHICUS 54 That there is a general form is proved by the fact that there otherwise it would not be the most general form . of proposition only what is essential to it may be described— It is clear that in the description of the most general form the meanings of the names are chosen accordingly . symbol which falls under the description can express a sense , if by a symbol , which falls under the description , and so that every one sign language , so that every possible sense can be expressed proposition ; i . e . to give a description of the propositions of some 4 . 5 Now it appears to be possible to give the most general form of symbol . another , but these relations are meaningless , unessential to the tautology and contradiction , i . e . they stand in relations to one 4 . 4661 Of course the signs are also combined with one another in the combinations of symbols , namely their dissolution . Tautology and contradiction are the limiting cases of the of the objects . And to no logical combination corresponds no combination only correspond to them definite combinations of objects . cannot be combinations of signs at all , for otherwise there could That is , propositions which are true for every state of affairs tion only corresponds to the unconnected signs . logical combination of their meanings ; every arbitrary combina- 4 . 466 To a definite logical combination of signs corresponds a definite altered without altering its sense . with the proposition . For the essence of the symbol cannot be same as the proposition . Therefore that product is identical 4 . 465 The logical product of a tautology and a proposition says the theory of probability . we have an indication of that gradation which we need in the contradiction impossible . Certain , possible , impossible : here 4 . 464 The truth of tautology is certain , of propositions possible , of reality . reality . Neither of them , therefore , can in any way determine contradiction fills the whole logical space and leaves no point to Tautology leaves to reality the whole infinite logical space ; TRACTATUS LOGICO-PHILOSOPHICUS 55 That is the foundation of the theory of probability . 5 . 1 The truth-functions can be ordered in series . their arguments the indices of these names . functions . For Frege the propositions of logic were names and at the root of Frege’s theory of the meaning of propositions and The confusion of argument and index is , if I am not mistaken , we attach it , e . g . The Cæsar of the Julian gens . index is always part of a description of the object to whose name derstood . In the name Julius Cæsar , Julius is an index . The be understood , unless the sense of “p” has previously been un- “p” is not an index but an argument ; the sense of “∼p”cannot and one could choose a simple sign instead of “+c” : but in “∼p” But this way of symbolizing depends on arbitrary agreement , that the whole sign is the addition sign for cardinal numbers . In Russell’s “+c” , for example , “c” is an index which indicates taining it from the argument just as much as from the index . indices of names . For I recognize the meaning of the sign con- 5 . 02 It is natural to confuse the arguments of functions with the sitions . 5 . 01 The elementary propositions are the truth-arguments of propo- An elementary proposition is a truth-function of itself . 5 Propositions are truth-functions of elementary propositions . 4 . 53 The general propositional form is a variable . propositions . say , that all propositions are generalizations of the elementary it is the totality of them all ) . So , in some sense , one could of all elementary propositions of course also from the fact that 4 . 52 The propositions are everything which follows from the totality these are all propositions and so are they limited . can simply ask : what propositions I can build out of them . And 4 . 51 Suppose all elementary propositions were given me : then we such is the case . i . e . constructed ) . The general form of proposition is : Such and cannot be a proposition whose form could not have been foreseen TRACTATUS LOGICO-PHILOSOPHICUS 56 time one of the propositions which assert “q” . 5 . 1241 “p . q” is one of the propositions which assert “p” and at the same 5 . 124 A proposition asserts every proposition which follows from it . which the proposition “p” is true without creating all its objects . on them are true . And similarly he could not create a world in creates thereby also a world in which all propositions consequent 5 . 123 If a god creates a world in which certain propositions are true , he 5 . 122 If pfollows from q , the sense of “p” is contained in that of “q” . from q . 5 . 121 The truth-grounds of qare contained in those of p ; pfollows grounds of the first . proposition q , if all the truth-grounds of the second are truth- 5 . 12 In particular the truth of a proposition pfollows from that of a propositions . that the truth of this proposition follows from the truth of those tions are all also truth-grounds of some one proposition , we say 5 . 11 If the truth-grounds which are common to a number of proposi- the proposition , I shall call its truth-grounds . Those truth-possibilities of its truth-arguments , which verify FFFF ) ( p , q ) Contradiction pand not p ; and qand not q . p ∼p q ∼q ] TFFF ) ( p , q ) „ „ pand q . p . q ] FTFF ) ( p , q ) „ „ qand not p . q ∼p ] FFTF ) ( p , q ) „ „ pand not q . p ∼q ] FFFT ) ( p , q ) „ „ Neither pnor q . ∼p ∼qor p|q ] TTFF ) ( p , q ) „ „ q TFTF ) ( p , q ) „ „ p TFFT ) ( p , q ) „ „ If p , then q ; and if q , then p . p≡q ] FTTF ) ( p , q ) „ „ por q , but not both . p ∼q : ∨ : q ∼p ] FTFT ) ( p , q ) „ „ Not p . ∼p ] FFTT ) ( p , q ) „ „ Not q . ∼q ] TTTF ) ( p , q ) „ „ por q . p∨q ] TTFT ) ( p , q ) „ „ If pthen q . p⊃q ] TFTT ) ( p , q ) „ „ If qthen p . q⊃p ] FTTT ) ( p , q ) in words : Not both pand q . ∼ ( p . q ) TTTT ) ( p , q ) Tautology if pthen p , and if qthen q ) p⊃p . q ⊃q ] can be written in a schema of the following kind : 5 . 101 The truth-functions of every number of elementary propositions TRACTATUS LOGICO-PHILOSOPHICUS 57 5 . 1362 The freedom of the will consists in the fact that future actions Superstition is the belief in the causal nexus . present . 5 . 1361 The events of the future cannot be inferred from those of the 5 . 136 There is no causal nexus which justifies such an inference . it . state of affairs to the existence of another entirely different from 5 . 135 In no way can an inference be made from the existence of one 5 . 134 From an elementary proposition no other can be inferred . 5 . 133 All inference takes place a priori . justify the conclusions , are senseless and would be superfluous . Laws of inference , which—as in Frege and Russell—are to Only they themselves can justify the inference . propositions alone . The method of inference is to be understood from the two 5 . 132 If pfollows from q , I can conclude from qto p ; infer pfrom q . erality is present also in the symbol “ ( x ) . fx” . The fact that we can infer fa from x ) . fx shows that gen- pnor q ) , then the inner connexion becomes obvious . “p∨q” “p|q | . p |q” and instead of “∼p” “p|p” p|q= neither by the method of symbolizing . But if we write , e . g . instead of the forms of the propositions “p∨q” and “∼p” is here concealed 5 . 1311 When we conclude from p∨qand ∼pto qthe relation between as , and by the very fact that , the propositions exist . a proposition ; for these relations are internal , and exist as soon in these relations first by connecting them with one another in ositions stand to one another , and we do not need to put them this expresses itself in relations in which the forms of these prop- 5 . 131 If the truth of one proposition follows from the truth of others , propositions , we perceive from the structure of the propositions . 5 . 13 That the truth of one proposition follows from the truth of other Every proposition which contradicts another , denies it . significant proposition which asserts them both . Two propositions are opposed to one another if there is no TRACTATUS LOGICO-PHILOSOPHICUS 58 one another we call independent . 5 . 152 Propositions which have no truth-arguments in common with 5 . 1511 There is no special object peculiar to probability propositions . proposition sthe probability Trs Tr . “T”’s of the proposition r ; then the proposition rgives to the “T”’s in the proposition s , which stand in the same columns as ber of the “T”’s in the proposition r , Trs the number of those 5 . 151 Suppose in a schema like that above in No . 5 . 101 Tris the num- osition “r” gives to the proposition “s” . the ratio Trs Trthe measure of the probability which the prop- which are at the same time truth-grounds of “r” , then we call Trs the number of those truth-grounds of the proposition “s” 5 . 15 If Tris the number of the truth-grounds of the proposition “r” , tology their substanceless centre . Contradiction is the external limit of the propositions , tau- all propositions . Contradiction vanishes so to speak outside , tautology inside mon with one another . which is shared by all propositions , which have nothing in com- proposition has in common with another . Tautology is that 5 . 143 Contradiction is something shared by propositions , which no 5 . 142 A tautology follows from all propositions : it says nothing . proposition . 5 . 141 If pfollows from qand qfrom pthen they are one and the same than the former , the former less than the latter . 5 . 14 If a proposition follows from another , then the latter says more belief in its truth . follow that it is true , then obviousness is no justification for our 5 . 1363 If from the fact that a proposition is obvious to us it does not “A knows that pis the case” is senseless if pis a tautology . necessity . connexion of knowledge and what is known is that of logical were an inner necessity , like that of logical deduction . —The cannot be known now . We could only know them if causality TRACTATUS LOGICO-PHILOSOPHICUS 59 other propositions . The probability proposition is , as it were , an extract from certain state of affairs , but it is always acomplete picture . A proposition can , indeed , be an incomplete picture of a something about its form . If we are not completely acquainted with a fact , but know in default of certainty do we need probability . It involves a general description of a propositional form . Only 5 . 156 Probability is a generalization . of a definite event such and such a degree of probability . with which I am not further acquainted—give to the occurrence 5 . 155 The unit of the probability proposition is : The circumstances— I have no closer acquaintance . the two events is independent of the circumstances with which What I can verify by the experiment is that the occurrence of 2 . ity 1 understood from the above explanations—to each the probabil- the occurrence of the other . That is they give—as can easily be to the occurrence of the one event no more probability than to to me including the natural laws hypothetically assumed ) give white and a black ball , this means , All the circumstances known If then , I say , It is equally probable that I should draw a So this is not a mathematical fact . as the drawing continues . bers of the black and white balls which are drawn approximate the urn . Then I can determine by the experiment that the num- no others ) . I draw one ball after another and put them back in 5 . 154 In an urn there are equal numbers of white and black balls and event occurs or does not occur , there is no middle course . 5 . 153 A proposition is in itself neither probable nor improbable . An Application to tautology and contradiction . limiting case of probability . pthe probability 1 . The certainty of logical conclusion is a If pfollows from q , the proposition qgives to the proposition 2 . tions ) give to one another the probability 1 Independent propositions e . g . any two elementary proposi- TRACTATUS LOGICO-PHILOSOPHICUS 60 certain formal relations . “p” , “q” , “r” , etc . , are variables which give general expression to “q” , and so on . This can only be expressed by the fact that 5 . 242 The same operation which makes “q” from “p” , makes “r” from ence between forms . 5 . 241 The operation does not characterize a form but only the differ- an operation , is the bases themselves . And that which is common to the bases , and the result of It gives expression to the difference between the forms . proceed from one form of proposition to another . 5 . 24 An operation shows itself in a variable ; it shows how we can Denial reverses the sense of a proposition . operations . Denial , logical addition , logical multiplication , etc . etc . , are 5 . 2341 The sense of a truth-function of pis a function of the sense of p . call these operations , truth-operations . operations which have the elementary propositions as bases . I 5 . 234 The truth-functions of elementary propositions , are results of where the logical construction of the proposition begins . osition arises from another in a logically significant way ; i . e . 5 . 233 The first place in which an operation can occur is where a prop- operation by which one term arises from another . 5 . 232 The internal relation which orders a series is equivalent to the the internal similarity of their forms . 5 . 231 And that will naturally depend on their formal properties , on order to make another out of it . 5 . 23 The operation is that which must happen to a proposition in tures of its result and its bases . 5 . 22 The operation is the expression of a relation between the struc- operation ) . tion which produces it from other propositions the bases of the pression , by presenting a proposition as the result of an opera- 5 . 21 We can bring out these internal relations in our manner of ex- relations . 5 . 2 The structures of propositions stand to one another in internal TRACTATUS LOGICO-PHILOSOPHICUS 61 as out of elementary propositions arise their truth-functions , According to the nature of truth-operations , in the same way arises from elementary propositions . The truth-operation is the way in which a truth-function tary propositions . 5 . 3 All propositions are results of truth-operations on the elemen- 5 . 254 Operations can vanish e . g . denial in “∼∼p” , ∼∼p=p ) . cancel one another . 5 . 253 One operation can reverse the effect of another . Operations can equivalent to the concept “and so on” . 5 . 2523 The concept of the successive application of an operation is follows x . the third the form of that term of the series which immediately the second the form of an arbitrary term xof the series , and first term of the expression is the beginning of the formal series , thus : “ [ a , x , O0x ] ” . This expression in brackets is a variable . The 5 . 2522 The general term of the formal series a , O0a , O0O0a , I write several operations to a number of propositions . In a similar sense I speak of the successive application of successive application of “O0ξ” to “a” ) . its successive application “O0O0O0a” is the result of the threefold 5 . 2521 The repeated application of an operation to its own result I call same . the possibility of this progress but have made use of it all the and Whitehead ) . Russell and Whitehead have not admitted series possible from type to type in the hierarchy of Russell 5 . 252 Only in this way is the progress from term to term in a formal operation can be its own basis . 5 . 251 A function cannot be its own argument , but the result of an other . Operation and function must not be confused with one an- does , and this depends on the bases of the operation . For an operation does not assert anything ; only its result of a proposition . 5 . 25 The occurrence of an operation does not characterize the sense TRACTATUS LOGICO-PHILOSOPHICUS 62 nothing . But all propositions of logic say the same thing . That is , propositions” . logic of mathematics ) should follow from half a dozen “primitive it is no less wonderful that the infinite number of propositions of namely ∼∼p , ∼∼∼∼p , etc . , is indeed hardly to be believed , and 5 . 43 That from a fact pan infinite number of others should follow , so on . the help of “∼” , and that this “∨” is the same as the first , and “∼” and “∨” is identical with that by which we define “∨” with And it is obvious that the “⊃” which we define by means of primitive signs and that they signify no relations . signs” of Frege and Russell shows by itself that these are not The possibility of crosswise definition of the logical “primitive etc . , is obvious . 5 . 42 That ∨ , ⊃ , etc . , are not relations in the sense of right and left , tary propositions . identical , which are one and the same truth-function of elemen- 5 . 41 For all those results of truth-operations on truth-functions are objects” or “logical constants” in the sense of Frege and Russell ) . 5 . 4 Here it becomes clear that there are no such things as “logical finite number of truth-operations to elementary propositions . 5 . 32 All truth-functions are results of the successive application of a when “p” and “q” are truth-functions of elementary propositions . expresses one truth-function of elementary propositions even And it is easy to see that the propositional sign in No . 4 . 442 are not elementary propositions . 5 . 31 The Schemata No . 4 . 31 are also significant , if “p” , “q” , “r” , etc . mentary propositions . Every proposition is the result of truth-operations on ele- operation on elementary propositions . ations on elementary propositions is also the result of one truth- The result of every truth-operation on the results of truth-oper- truth-function of elementary propositions , i . e . a proposition . creates from truth-functions of elementary propositions another from truth-functions arises a new one . Every truth-operation TRACTATUS LOGICO-PHILOSOPHICUS 63 Thus in the “Principia Mathematica” of Russell and White- so to speak , an entirely innocent face . may be introduced in logic in brackets or in the margin—with , must always be an event full of consequences . No new symbol 5 . 452 The introduction of a new expedient in the symbolism of logic mutandis , for the introduction of primitive signs also . said about the introduction of signs by definitions holds , mutatis In short , what Frege “Grundgesetze der Arithmetik” ) has no reason to use the same way of symbolizing in the two cases . its meaning in the two cases was the same , and there would be and then for another , for it would then remain doubtful whether and others . We may not first introduce it for one class of cases the form “∼p” , just as in propositions like “∼ ( p∨q ) ” , “ ( ∃x ) . ∼fx” if denial is introduced , we must understand it in propositions of duce it for one context and then again for another . For example , all contexts in which it occurs at all . One cannot therefore intro- other . If a primitive idea is introduced it must be introduced in 5 . 451 If logic has primitive ideas these must be independent of one an- clear . The construction of logic out of its primitive signs must become their position relative to one another and justify their existence . 5 . 45 If there are logical primitive signs a correct logic must make clear operations which have it as their basis are given with it . 5 . 442 If a proposition is given to us then the results of all truth- the same as “fa” . if “∼ ( ∃x ) . ∼fx” says the same as “ ( x ) . f x” , or “ ( ∃x ) . fx . x =a” 5 . 441 This disappearance of the apparent logical constants also occurs would then treat of ∼ , the other would not . have to say something other than “p” . For the one proposition And if there was an object called “∼” , then “∼∼p” would but the possibility of denial is already prejudged in affirmation . The proposition “∼∼p” does not treat of denial as an object , Does “∼∼p” deny ∼p , or does it affirm p ; or both ? the denial—in any sense—contained in the affirmation ? If e . g . an affirmation can be produced by repeated denial , is 5 . 44 Truth-functions are not material functions . TRACTATUS LOGICO-PHILOSOPHICUS 64 5 . 4611 Logical operation signs are punctuations . would believe that the brackets have meaning by themselves . that these are not the real primitive signs ; and nobody of course The use of brackets with these apparent primitive signs shows importance . like ∨and ⊃need brackets—unlike real relations is of great 5 . 461 The apparently unimportant fact that the apparent relations etc . , but the most general form of their combinations . that the proper general primitive signs are not “p∨q” , “ ( ∃x ) . fx” , combinations of brackets ; and it would then have become clear should then already have introduced the effect of all possible therefore not only “p∨q” but also “∼ ( p∨∼q ) ” , etc . etc . We all their combinations has been already introduced with them : 5 . 46 When we have rightly introduced the logical signs , the sense of valid . A sphere in which the proposition , simplex sigillum veri , is into a closed regular structure . questions whose answers—a priori—are symmetrical and united Men have always thought that there must be a sphere of standard of simplicity . 5 . 4541 The solution of logical problems must be simple for they set the In logic there cannot be a more general and a more special . 5 . 454 In logic there is no side by side , there can be no classification . There are no pre-eminent numbers . in logic . Or rather it must become plain that there are no numbers 5 . 453 All numbers in logic must be capable of justification . clear . expedient always to be used ? Its position in logic must be made essary in one place , we must immediately ask : Where is this But if the introduction of a new expedient has proved nec- not allowed . There was none , and can be none for the process is actually Why suddenly words here ? This would need a justification . head there occur definitions and primitive propositions in words . TRACTATUS LOGICO-PHILOSOPHICUS 65 have a sense ; and I say : Every possible proposition is legit- 5 . 4733 Frege says : Every legitimately constructed proposition must which serve no purpose are logically meaningless . Signs which serve one purpose are logically equivalent , signs in a symbolism mean nothing . by its practical success . It simply says that unnecessary elements 5 . 47321 Occam’s razor is , of course , not an arbitrary rule nor one justified 5 . 4732 We cannot give a sign the wrong sense . think illogically . take . That logic is a priori consists in the fact that we cannot discarded in logic by language itself preventing every logical mis- 5 . 4731 Self-evidence , of which Russell has said so much , can only be In a certain sense we cannot make mistakes in logic . in itself unpermissible . made some arbitrary determination , not because the symbol is “identical” . The proposition is senseless because we have not cal” means nothing because there is no property which is called which is possible in logic is also permitted . “Socrates is identi- Apossible sign must also be able to signify . Everything 5 . 473 Logic must take care of itself . description of the one and only general primitive sign in logic . 5 . 472 The description of the most general propositional form is the all description , therefore the essence of the world . 5 . 4711 To give the essence of proposition means to give the essence of 5 . 471 The general form of proposition is the essence of proposition . That however is the general form of proposition . one another . propositions , according to their nature , have in common with One could say : the one logical constant is that which all and where these are , all logical constants already are . Where there is composition , there is argument and function , tary proposition . For “fa” says the same as “ ( ∃x ) . fx . x=a” . For all logical operations are already contained in the elemen- the form of all propositions at all can be said on one occasion . 5 . 47 It is clear that everything which can be said beforehand about TRACTATUS LOGICO-PHILOSOPHICUS 66 all values of xare the propositions to be described . 3 . Giving instead of the variable . 2 . Giving a function fx , whose values for meration . In this case we can place simply its constant values We may distinguish 3 kinds of description : 1 . Direct enu- takes place is unessential . How the description of the terms of the expression in brackets which the variable stands for . The determination is the description of the propositions The values of the variables must be determined . Thus if ξhas the 3 values P , Q , R , then ξ ) = P , Q , R ) . indicates that it stands for all its values in the bracket . terms of the expression in brackets , and the line over the variable a sign of the form “ ( ξ ) ” . “ξ” is a variable whose values are the cate—if the order of the terms in the bracket is indifferent—by 5 . 501 An expression in brackets whose terms are propositions I indi- bracket and I call it the negation of these propositions . This operation denies all the propositions in the right-hand the operation – – – – –T ) ( ξ , to elementary propositions . 5 . 5 Every truth-function is a result of the successive application of of a rule . primitive ideas which must be signified but with the expression 5 . 476 It is clear that we are not concerned here with a number of number of dimensions—of a definite mathematical multiplicity . 5 . 475 It is only a question of constructing a system of signs of a definite on our notation . 5 . 474 The number of necessary fundamental operations depends only have the sign in common with one another only by accident . symbol is in the two cases entirely different ; the two symbols ferent way—the symbolizing relation is another—therefore the it occurs as the sign of equality it symbolizes in an entirely dif- given no meaning to the word “identical” as adjective . For when Thus “Socrates is identical” says nothing , because we have Even if we believe that we have done so . parts . because we have given no meaning to some of its constituent imately constructed , and if it has no sense this can only be TRACTATUS LOGICO-PHILOSOPHICUS 67 to which all the propositions asserting pare constructed , a rule all the propositions denying pare constructed , a rule according 5 . 514 If a notation is fixed , there is in it a rule according to which says the same as “q” ; that “p∨∼p” says nothing . Thus even in Russell’s notation it is evident that “q : p∨∼p” there is only one proposition which lies altogether outside it . another ; and every proposition has only one negative , because to one another when they have nothing in common with one And similarly we can say : Two propositions are opposed symbols , which assert either por q , is the proposition “p∨q” . both pand q , is the proposition “p q” . What is common to all 5 . 513 We could say : What is common to all symbols , which assert this which is common to them all mirrors denial . “∼p∨∼p” , “∼p ∼p” , etc . etc . to infinity ) are constructed . And Hence the common rule according to which “∼p” , “∼∼∼p” , all signs of this notation , which deny p , have in common . That which denies in “∼p” is however not “∼” , but that which bring it into agreement with reality ? “∼p” “p” is a false proposition . How then can the stroke “∼” 5 . 512 “∼p” is true if “p” is false . Therefore in the true proposition are connected into an infinitely fine network , to the great mirror . such special catches and manipulations ? Only because all these 5 . 511 How can the all-embracing logic which mirrors the world use values then N ( ξ ) = ∼p ∼q ( neither pnor q ) . 5 . 51 If ξhas only one value , then N ( ξ ) = ∼p ( not p ) , if it has two exact expression . not to be constructed by means of it , this must be capable of structed by means of this operation and how propositions are 5 . 503 As it is obviously easy to express how propositions can be con- variable ξ . N ( ξ ) is the negation of all the values of the propositional 5 . 502 Therefore I write instead of “ ( – – – – –T ) ( ξ , ” , “N ( ξ ) ” . all the terms of a formal series . structed . In this case the terms of the expression in brackets are a formal law , according to which those propositions are con- TRACTATUS LOGICO-PHILOSOPHICUS 68 does—in words “fx is possible” . 5 . 525 It is not correct to render the proposition “ ( ∃x ) . fx”—as Russell elementary propositions are also given . If the elementary propositions are given , then therewith all 5 . 524 If the objects are given , therewith are all objects also given . 5 . 523 The generality symbol occurs as an argument . constants prominent . that it refers to a logical prototype , and secondly , that it makes 5 . 522 That which is peculiar to the “symbolism of generality” is firstly , in which both ideas lie concealed . difficult to understand the propositions “ ( ∃x ) . fx” and “ ( x ) . fx” with the logical product or the logical sum . Then it would be Frege and Russell have introduced generality in connexion 5 . 521 I separate the concept all from the truth-function . values of x , then N ( ξ ) = ∼ ( ∃x ) . fx . 5 . 52 If the values of ξare the total values of a function fx for all the negative proposition and conversely . The positive proposition must presuppose the existence of structed with the positive . But here also the negative proposition is indirectly con- express that aRb is not the case . Like : if “a” does not stand in a certain relation to “b” , it could to express the negative proposition by means of a negative fact ? means of the sign of the positive ? Why should one not be able 5 . 5151 Must the sign of the negative proposition be constructed by can have no sense . have no sense . If , however , “p∨p” has no sense , then also “p∨q” the signs “p∨p” , “p p” , etc . which have the same sense as “p” complex sign , then by itself it cannot have sense ; but then also “∨” , “∼” , etc . If the sign “p” in “p∨q” does not stand for a And this is the case , for the symbols “p” and “q” presuppose “∨” , “ . ” , etc . , must be propositions . 5 . 515 It must be recognized in our symbols that what is connected by and in them their sense is mirrored . structed , and so on . These rules are equivalent to the symbols according to which all the propositions asserting por qare con- TRACTATUS LOGICO-PHILOSOPHICUS 69 identity itself . to a , but in order to express this we should need the sign of One could of course say that in fact only ahas this relation satisfy the function fwhich have a certain relation to a . only asatisfies the function f , and not that only such things “ ( x ) fx . ⊃ . x =a” . What this proposition says is simply that becomes very clear if , for example , one considers the proposition 5 . 5301 That identity is not a relation between objects is obvious . This of the signs . means of a sign of identity . Difference of the objects by difference 5 . 53 Identity of the object I express by identity of the sign and not by is one more elementary proposition true . If an elementary proposition is true , then , at any rate , there delimit . tions is exactly that which the completely general propositions allowed to its structure by the totality of elementary proposi- in the general structure of the world . And the range which is 5 . 5262 The truth or falsehood of every proposition alters something common with other symbols . A characteristic of a composite symbol : it has something in proposition . dently in signifying relations to the world as in the ungeneralized we must mention “φ” and “x” separately . Both stand indepen- tion composite . This is shown by the fact that in “ ( ∃x , φ ) . φx” 5 . 5261 A completely generalized proposition is like every other proposi- one x , which ” : and this xis a . we need simply say after an expression “there is one and only In order then to arrive at the customary way of expression name with a definite object . ized propositions , i . e . without from the outset co-ordinating any 5 . 526 One can describe the world completely by completely general- present in the symbol itself . That precedent to which one would always appeal , must be is a tautology , a significant proposition or a contradiction . not expressed by a proposition but by the fact that an expression Certainty , possibility or impossibility of a state of affairs are TRACTATUS LOGICO-PHILOSOPHICUS 70 symbols by “p⊃p” and has put it as hypothesis before certain of Mathematics has rendered the nonsense “pis a proposition” in archetype Proposition , Thing , etc . So Russell in the Principles indeed this takes place when one would like to speak of the sions of the form “a=a” or “p⊃p” and of that kind . And 5 . 5351 There are certain cases in which one is tempted to use expres- of names with different meanings . pressed in language by the fact that there is an infinite number What the axiom of infinity is meant to say would be ex- Russell’s “Axiom of Infinity” . This is the place to solve all the problems which arise through do-propositions . 5 . 535 So all problems disappear which are connected with such pseu- in a correct logical notation at all . c . ⊃a=c” , “ ( x ) . x =x” , “ ( ∃x ) . x =a” , etc . cannot be written 5 . 534 And we see that apparent propositions like : “a=a” , “a=b b = ical notation . 5 . 533 The identity sign is therefore not an essential constituent of log- fx ∼ ( ∃x , y ) . fx fy” . And the proposition “only one xsatisfies f ( ” reads : “ ( ∃x ) . fa ∼ ( ∃x , y ) . fx fy” . 5 . 5321 Instead of “ ( x ) fx ⊃x=a” we therefore write e . g . “ ( ∃x ) . fx . ⊃ f ( x , y ) . ∨ . ∃x ) . f ( x , x ) ” . Therefore instead of Russell’s “ ( ∃x , y ) . f ( x , y ) ” : “ ( ∃x , y ) . and not “ ( ∃x , y ) . f ( x , y ) . ∼x=y” , but “ ( ∃x , y ) . f x , y ) ” . 5 . 532 And analogously : not “ ( ∃x , y ) . f x , y ) . x =y” , but “ ( ∃x ) . f ( x , x ) ” ; And not “f ( a , b ) . ∼a=b” , but “f ( a , b ) ” . 5 . 531 I write therefore not “f ( a , b ) . a =b” , but “f ( a , a ) ” or “f ( b , b ) ” ) . is to say nothing . nonsense , and to say of one thing that it is identical with itself 5 . 5303 Roughly speaking : to say of two things that they are identical is significant . mon . Even if this proposition is never true , it is nevertheless cannot say that two objects have all their properties in com- 5 . 5302 Russell’s definition of “=” won’t do ; because according to it one TRACTATUS LOGICO-PHILOSOPHICUS 71 are combined in such and such a way . 5 . 5423 To perceive a complex means to perceive that its constituents theory does not satisfy this condition . p” must show that it is impossible to judge a nonsense . Russell’s 5 . 5422 The correct explanation of the form of the proposition “A judges A composite soul would not be a soul any longer . etc . —as it is conceived in contemporary superficial psychology . 5 . 5421 This shows that there is no such thing as the soul—the subject , a co-ordination of their objects . of a fact and an object , but a co-ordination of facts by means of are of the form “‘p’ says p” : and here we have no co-ordination 5 . 542 But it is clear that “A believes that p” , “A thinks p” , “A says p” , propositions have been conceived in this way . And in modern epistemology Russell , Moore , etc . those the object A in a kind of relation . Here it appears superficially as if the proposition pstood to “A thinks , that pis the case” , or “A thinks p” , etc . Especially in certain propositional forms of psychology , like which one proposition could occur in another . 5 . 541 At first sight it appears as if there were also a different way in osition only as bases of the truth-operations . 5 . 54 In the general propositional form , propositions occur in a prop- identical with themselves ? not be true if indeed “There were things” , but these were not “∼ ( ∃x ) . x =x” . But even if this were a proposition—would it 5 . 5352 Similarly it was proposed to express “There are no things” by than the senseless hypothesis attached for this purpose . therefore it survives the wrong arguments no better and no worse itself becomes senseless for arguments of the wrong kind , and comes not false but meaningless , and because the proposition because the hypothesis for a non-proposition as argument be- sition in order to ensure that its arguments have the right form , It is nonsense to place the hypothesis p⊃pbefore a propo- be occupied by propositions . propositions to show that their places for arguments could only TRACTATUS LOGICO-PHILOSOPHICUS 72 There is no pre-eminent number . And how should this be decided—by experience ? numbers of things individuals ) . But between what numbers ? 5 . 553 Russell said that there were simple relations between different then could there be a logic , since there is a world ? could say : if there were a logic , even if there were no world , how 5 . 5521 And if this were not the case , how could we apply logic ? We It is before the How , not before the What . Logic precedes every experience—that something is so . experience . such and such is the case , but that something is ; but that is no 5 . 552 The “experience” which we need to understand logic is not that fundamentally wrong track . a problem by looking at the world , this shows that we are on a And if we get into a situation where we need to answer such decided at all by logic can be decided without further trouble . 5 . 551 Our fundamental principle is that every question which can be give the composition of the elementary proposition . not give the number of names with different meanings , we cannot The elementary proposition consists of names . Since we can- of the elementary propositions . 5 . 55 We must now answer a priori the question as to all possible forms aappears in front and bbehind , and vice versa . If I fix my eyes first on the corners aand only glance at b , For we really see two different facts . can be seen in two ways as a cube ; and all similar phenomena . This perhaps explains that the figure TRACTATUS LOGICO-PHILOSOPHICUS 73 What lies in the application logic cannot anticipate . there are . 5 . 557 The application of logic decides what elementary propositions crete that there are . Our problems are not abstract but perhaps the most con- complete truth itself . which we ought to give here is not a simile of truth but the they are , logically completely in order . That most simple thing 5 . 5563 All propositions of our colloquial language are actually , just as understands the propositions in their unanalysed form . mentary propositions , then this must be known by everyone who 5 . 5562 If we know on purely logical grounds , that there must be ele- The hierarchies are and must be independent of reality . sitions . boundary appears again in the totality of elementary propo- 5 . 5561 Empirical reality is limited by the totality of objects . The ositions . Only that which we ourselves construct can we foresee . 5 . 556 There cannot be a hierarchy of the forms of the elementary prop- that which makes it possible for me to invent them . forms in logic which I can invent : but I must have to deal with And how would it be possible that I should have to deal with single symbols . there this system is the logically important thing and not the Where , however , we can build symbols according to a system , apart from its special logical form . 5 . 555 It is clear that we have a concept of the elementary proposition thing can be the case ? Has the question sense : what must be in order that some- not know whether anything can correspond to it ? 5 . 5542 May we then ask this at all ? Can we set out a sign form and of a 27-termed relation . can get into a situation in which I need to symbolize with a sign 5 . 5541 It should be possible to decide a priori whether , for example , I trary . 5 . 554 The enumeration of any special forms would be entirely arbi- TRACTATUS LOGICO-PHILOSOPHICUS 74 world . 5 . 632 The subject does not belong to the world but it is a limit of the mention could not be made . sense there is no subject : that is to say , of it alone in this book isolating the subject or rather of showing that in an important will and which do not , etc . This then would be a method of therein to report on my body and say which members obey my If I wrote a book “The world as I found it” , I should also have 5 . 631 The thinking , presenting subject ; there is no such thing . 5 . 63 I am my world . The microcosm . 5 . 621 The world and life are one . mean the limits of my world . limits of the language the language which only I understand ) That the world is my world , shows itself in the fact that the be said , but it shows itself . In fact what solipsism means , is quite correct , only it cannot sism is a truth . 5 . 62 This remark provides a key to the question , to what extent solip- therefore say what we cannot think . What we cannot think , that we cannot think : we cannot consider these limits from the other side also . logic must get outside the limits of the world : that is , if it could tain possibilities , and this cannot be the case since otherwise For that would apparently presuppose that we exclude cer- the world , that there is not . We cannot therefore say in logic : This and this there is in 5 . 61 Logic fills the world : the limits of the world are also its limits . 5 . 6 The limits of my language mean the limits of my world . lead to obvious nonsense to try to give them . 5 . 5571 If I cannot give elementary propositions a priori then it must other . Therefore logic and its application may not overlap one an- But logic must have contact with its application . It is clear that logic may not collide with its application . TRACTATUS LOGICO-PHILOSOPHICUS 75 can be created . the way in which by an operation out of one proposition another is constructed , then thereby we are also given the general form of 6 . 002 If we are given the general form of the way in which a proposition propositions . successive applications of the operation N0 ( ξ ) to the elementary 6 . 001 This says nothing else than that every proposition is the result of This is the general form of proposition . 6 The general form of truth-function is : p , ξ , N ( ξ ) . subject , the limit—not a part of the world . the human soul of which psychology treats , but the metaphysical The philosophical I is not the man , not the human body or is my world” . The I occurs in philosophy through the fact that the “world talk of a non-psychological I . 5 . 641 There is therefore really a sense in which in philosophy we can point and there remains the reality co-ordinated with it . pure realism . The I in solipsism shrinks to an extensionless 5 . 64 Here we see that solipsism strictly carried out coincides with There is no order of things a priori . Everything we can describe at all could also be otherwise . Everything we see could also be otherwise . also a priori . 5 . 634 This is connected with the fact that no part of our experience is 5 . 6331 For the field of sight has not a form like this : that it is seen from an eye . And from nothing in the field of sight can it be concluded the field of sight . But you do not really see the eye . You say that this case is altogether like that of the eye and 5 . 633 Where in the world is a metaphysical subject to be noted ? TRACTATUS LOGICO-PHILOSOPHICUS 76 6 . 1 The propositions of logic are tautologies . need in mathematics is not the accidental one . This is connected with the fact that the generality which we 6 . 031 The theory of classes is altogether superfluous in mathematics . 6 . 03 The general form of the cardinal number is : 0 , ξ , ξ + 1 ] . of all special equalities of numbers . And the concept of equality of numbers is the general form The concept number is the variable number . to all numbers , the general form of number . 6 . 022 The concept number is nothing else than that which is common 6 . 021 A number is the exponent of an operation . and so on . 0+1+1+1=3Def . 0 + 1 + 1 = 2 Def . 0 + 1 = 1 Def . And I define : “ [ Ω00x , Ων0x , Ων+10x ] ” . Therefore I write in place of “ [ x , ξ , Ω0ξ ] ” , as : Ω00x , Ω0+10x , Ω0+1+10x , Ω0+1+1+10x x , Ω0x , Ω0Ω0x , Ω0Ω0Ω0x According , then , to these symbolic rules we write the series Ω0Ων0x= Ων+10xDef . x= Ω00xDef . and 6 . 02 And thus we come to numbers : I define sition to another . This is the most general form of transition from one propo- = η , ξ , N ( ξ ) ) . 6 . 01 The general form of the operation Ω0 ( η ) is therefore : ξ , N ( ξ ) 0 ( η ) TRACTATUS LOGICO-PHILOSOPHICUS 77 instead of tautologies . 6 . 1202 It is clear that we could have used for this purpose contradictions shows that fa follows from x ) . fx , etc . etc . follows from pand p⊃q . That “ ( x ) . f x ⊃ : fa” is a tautology in the form “ ( p⊃q ) . p ) ⊃ : q ) ” give a tautology shows that q That the propositions “p⊃q” , “p” and “q” connected together ∼p ) ” give a tautology shows that they contradict one another . 6 . 1201 That e . g . the propositions “p” and “∼p” in the connexion “∼ ( p therefore that they possess these properties of structure . structure . That they give a tautology when so connected shows way may give a tautology they must have definite properties of In order that propositions connected together in a definite give a tautology characterizes the logic of its constituent parts . That its constituent parts connected together in this way formal—logical—properties of language , of the world . 6 . 12 The fact that the propositions of logic are tautologies shows the sitions alone . non-logical propositions can not be recognized from the propo- one of the most important facts that the truth or falsehood of contains in itself the whole philosophy of logic . And so also it is perceive in the symbol alone that they are true ; and this fact 6 . 113 It is the characteristic mark of logical propositions that one can a peculiar position among all propositions . 6 . 112 The correct explanation of logical propositions must give them understood . natural science and this is a certain symptom of its being falsely our proposition now gets quite the character of a proposition of are either yellow or red” would sound even if it were true . Indeed appears self-evident , no more so than the proposition “All roses tion possesses one of these properties . This now by no means then it would appear as a remarkable fact that every proposi- and “false” signify two properties among other properties , and are always false . One could e . g . believe that the words “true” 6 . 111 Theories which make a proposition of logic appear substantial analytical propositions . 6 . 11 The propositions of logic therefore say nothing . They are the TRACTATUS LOGICO-PHILOSOPHICUS 78 the form “ξ η” thus : — The form “∼ξ” is written in our notation osition as ∼ ( p ∼p ) ( The Law of Contradiction ) is a tautology . tion p⊃q . Now I will proceed to inquire whether such a prop- This sign , for example , would therefore present the proposi- lines in the following way : osition with the truth-combinations of the truth-arguments by and the co-ordination of the truth or falsity of the whole prop- express by brackets , e . g . “r” , etc . , “T pF ” , “T qF ” , “T rF ” , etc . The truth-combinations I of the following intuitive method : I write instead of “p” , “q” , which no sign of generality occurs in the tautology , make use 6 . 1203 In order to recognize a tautology as such , we can , in cases in TRACTATUS LOGICO-PHILOSOPHICUS 79 6 . 1223 It now becomes clear why we often feel as though “logical truths” be incapable of being established by any such . being contradicted by any possible experience , but it must also refuted . Not only must a proposition of logic be incapable of no more be empirically established than they can be empirically 6 . 1222 This throws light on the question why logical propositions can them to “p⊃q . p ⊃ : q” and then showing that this is a tautology . propositions themselves , but we can also show it by combining E . g . that “q” follows from “p⊃q p” we see from these two the connexion “p⊃q” , then it is clear that qfollows from p . 6 . 1221 If for example two propositions “p” and “q” give a tautology in properties of the propositions by mere inspection . tions , for we can recognize in an adequate notation the formal 6 . 122 Whence it follows that we can get on without logical proposi- ositions must be logically constructed . another , and the state of equilibrium then shows how these prop- proposition propositions are brought into equilibrium with one This method could be called a zero-method . In a logical nothing . propositions , by combining them into propositions which say 6 . 121 The propositions of logic demonstrate the logical properties of truth-combinations . truth-combinations of its argument , its falsity with none of the the truth of the whole proposition is co-ordinated with all the of the outermost T and F with the innermost , it is seen that If here we put “p” instead of “q” and examine the combination Hence the proposition ∼ ( p ∼q ) runs thus : — TRACTATUS LOGICO-PHILOSOPHICUS 80 scription of all “true” logical propositions . 6 . 125 It is possible , even in the old logic , to give at the outset a de- language , then all the propositions of logic are already given . asserts . That is to say , if we know the logical syntax of any sign but in logic the nature of the essentially necessary signs itself logic it is not we who express , by means of signs , what we want , much not . In logic only this expresses : but this means that in We said that in the symbols which we use much is arbitrary , inite character—are tautologies . Herein lies the decisive point . certain combinations of symbols—which essentially have a def- It is clear that it must show something about the world that sitions have sense . And this is their connexion with the world . suppose that names have meaning , and that elementary propo- or rather they present it . They “treat” of nothing . They pre- 6 . 124 The logical propositions describe the scaffolding of the world , question whether our world is really of this kind or not . not valid . But it is clear that logic has nothing to do with the 6 . 1233 We can imagine a world in which the axiom of reducibility is true , they can only be true by a happy chance . not logical propositions , and this explains our feeling that , if mortal” . Propositions like Russell’s “axiom of reducibility” are accidental general validity , e . g . of the proposition “all men are 6 . 1232 Logical general validity , we could call essential as opposed to a generalized one . An ungeneralized proposition can be tautologous just as well as To be general is only to be accidentally valid for all things . 6 . 1231 The mark of logical propositions is not their general validity . to itself . law of contradiction ; but one is sufficient , since it is not applied There is not , as Russell supposed , for every “type” a special logical laws . 6 . 123 It is clear that the laws of logic cannot themselves obey further forms and of inference . 6 . 1224 It also becomes clear why logic has been called the theory of far as we can postulate an adequate notation . must be “postulated ” by us . We can in fact postulate them in so TRACTATUS LOGICO-PHILOSOPHICUS 81 Every tautology itself shows that it is a tautology . which are essentially primitive and others deduced from these . 6 . 127 All propositions of logic are of equal rank ; there are not some is its own proof . 6 . 1265 Logic can always be conceived to be such that every proposition osition . signs . And the modus ponens can not be expressed by a prop- Every proposition of logic is a modus ponens presented in proof . shows that it is so ; in logic every proposition is the form of a 6 . 1264 The significant proposition asserts something , and its proof things . proposition and the proof in logic must be two quite different is clear from the beginning that the logical proof of a significant osition logically from another , and a logical proposition also . It 6 . 1263 It would be too remarkable , if one could prove a significant prop- recognition of tautology , where it is complicated . 6 . 1262 Proof in logic is only a mechanical expedient to facilitate the prises . 6 . 1261 In logic process and result are equivalent . Therefore no sur- are tautologies . from which the proof starts , must show without proof that they tologies is quite unessential to logic . Because the propositions , Naturally this way of showing that its propositions are tau- tautology only tautologies follow . which again generate tautologies out of the first . And from a logical propositions by applying in succession certain operations , We prove a logical proposition by creating it out of other rules . form the logical propositions out of others by mere symbolic without troubling ourselves about a sense and a meaning , we And this we do when we prove a logical proposition . For determining the logical properties of the symbol . 6 . 126 Whether a proposition belongs to logic can be determined by 6 . 1251 Hence there can never be surprises in logic . TRACTATUS LOGICO-PHILOSOPHICUS 82 But what is essential about equation is that it is not neces- different senses . 6 . 232 Frege says that these expressions have the same meaning but “ ( 1 + 1 ) + 1 + 1 ) ” . It is a property of “1+1+1+1” that it can be conceived as denial . 6 . 231 It is a property of affirmation that it can be conceived as double can be substituted for one another . It characterizes the logical form of two expressions , that they themselves . whether this is the case must show itself in the two expressions means that they can be substituted for one another . But 6 . 23 If two expressions are connected by the sign of equality , this tautologies , mathematics shows in equations . 6 . 22 The logic of the world which the propositions of logic show in that proposition ? ” constantly leads to valuable results . In philosophy the question “Why do we really use that word , which equally do not belong to mathematics . from propositions which do not belong to mathematics to others but we use mathematical propositions only in order to infer 6 . 211 In life it is never a mathematical proposition which we need , 6 . 21 Mathematical propositions express no thoughts . fore pseudo-propositions . The propositions of mathematics are equations , and there- 6 . 2 Mathematics is a logical method . Logic is transcendental . 6 . 13 Logic is not a theory but a reflexion of the world . sition . to the degree of self-evidence as the criterion of a logical propo- markable that so exact a thinker as Frege should have appealed this would no longer be immediately self-evident . But it is re- Frege’s primitive propositions . Frege would perhaps say that osition by simply forming , for example , the logical product of is arbitrary , for we could deduce logic from one primitive prop- 6 . 1271 It is clear that the number of “primitive propositions of logic” TRACTATUS LOGICO-PHILOSOPHICUS 83 outside logic all is accident . 6 . 3 Logical research means the investigation of all regularity . And = Ω0Ω ) 0 ( Ω0Ω ) 0x= Ω0Ω0Ω0Ω0x= Ω1+1+1+10x= Ω40x . Ω2×20x= Ω2 ) 20x= Ω2 ) 1+10x= Ω20Ω20x= Ω1+10Ω1+10x Ων ) µ0x= Ων×µ0xDef . 6 . 241 Thus the proof of the proposition 2×2 = 4 runs : replacing expressions by others in accordance with the equations . and we proceed from a number of equations to new equations , For equations express the substitutability of two expressions , the method of substitution . 6 . 24 The method by which mathematics arrives at its equations is of mathematics must be self-intelligible . tions . On this method depends the fact that every proposition 6 . 2341 The essential of mathematical method is working with equa- 6 . 234 Mathematics is a method of logic . Calculation is not an experiment . 6 . 2331 The process of calculation brings about just this intuition . here supplies the necessary intuition . mathematical problems it must be answered that language itself 6 . 233 To the question whether we need intuition for the solution of their equality of meaning . consider the two expressions , that is to say the standpoint of 6 . 2323 The equation characterizes only the standpoint from which I ing , I know whether they mean the same or something different . meaning , I must know their meaning , and if I know their mean- serted . For in order to be able to assert anything about their 6 . 2322 The identity of the meaning of two expressions cannot be as- correctness . having to compare what they express with the facts as regards nothing else than that their correctness can be seen without our 6 . 2321 And , that the propositions of mathematics can be proved means perceived from the two expressions themselves . by the sign of equality , have the same meaning : for this can be sary in order to show that both expressions , which are connected TRACTATUS LOGICO-PHILOSOPHICUS 84 ∗I . e . not the form of one particular law , but of any law of a certain sort B . R . . science , and says : Whatever building thou wouldst erect , thou axioms . It thus provides the bricks for building the edifice of given way from a number of given propositions—the mechanical propositions in the description of the world must be obtained in a world . Mechanics determine a form of description by saying : All different networks correspond different systems of describing the with the finer square mesh , or vice versa , and so on . To the the surface more accurately with a triangular , and coarser , than aid of a triangular mesh ; that is to say we might have described happen that the description would have been simpler with the equal success a net with a triangular or hexagonal mesh . It can form . This form is arbitrary , because I could have applied with I shall have brought the description of the surface to a unified now say of every square that it is white or black . In this way if I cover the surface with a sufficiently fine square network and these make I can always get as near as I like to its description , irregular black spots . We now say : Whatever kind of picture universe to a unified form . Let us imagine a white surface with 6 . 341 Newtonian mechanics , for example , brings the description of the of science . these are a priori intuitions of possible forms of the propositions ity in nature , the law of least expenditure in nature , etc . etc . , all 6 . 34 All propositions , such as the law of causation , the law of continu- a priori the possibility of a logical form . 6 . 33 We do not believe a priori in a law of conservation , but we know the a priori certain proves to be something purely logical . tion” , before they knew exactly how it ran . Here , as always , 6 . 3211 Men had indeed an idea that there must be a“law of least ac- in physics there are causal laws , laws of the causality form . are , for instance , minimum-laws , such as that of least action , so 6 . 321 “Law of Causality” is a class name . And as in mechanics there 6 . 32 The law of causality is not a law but the form of a law . ∗ it cannot be a law a priori either . law , for it is obviously a significant proposition . —And therefore 6 . 31 The so-called law of induction cannot in any case be a logical TRACTATUS LOGICO-PHILOSOPHICUS 85 laws” . 6 . 36 If there were a law of causality , it might run : “There are natural not of what the network described . Laws , like the law of causation , etc . , treat of the network and erties can be given a priori . position . But the network is purely geometrical , and all its prop- ometry can obviously say nothing about their actual form and 6 . 35 Although the spots in our picture are geometrical figures , ge- some points or other . mention of particular material points in it , but always only of chanics is always quite general . There is , for example , never any 6 . 3432 We must not forget that the description of the world by me- speak of the objects of the world . 6 . 3431 Through the whole apparatus of logic the physical laws still world . all true propositions which we need for the description of the 6 . 343 Mechanics is an attempt to construct according to a single plan by another says something about the world . can be described more simply by one system of mechanics than which it is described , as is indeed the case . The fact , too , that it thing , namely , that it can be described in that particular way in chanics asserts nothing about the world ; but this asserts some- So too the fact that it can be described by Newtonian me- net of definite fineness . fact , namely , that it can be completely described by a definite picture of this kind . But this does characterize the picture , the form asserts nothing about the picture . For this holds of every that instanced above can be described by a network of a given as out of triangles and hexagons together . That a picture like We could construct the network out of figures of different kinds , 6 . 342 And now we see the relative position of logic and mechanics . must be able to write down any arbitrary physical proposition . down any arbitrary number , so with the system of mechanics one As with the system of numbers one must be able to write alone . shalt construct it in some manner with these bricks and these TRACTATUS LOGICO-PHILOSOPHICUS 86 simplest course of events will really happen . It is clear that there are no grounds for believing that the chological one . 6 . 3631 This process , however , has no logical foundation but only a psy- law that can be made to harmonize with our experience . 6 . 363 The process of induction is the process of assuming the simplest by the law of causality cannot be described . 6 . 362 What can be described can happen too , and what is excluded turned round in four-dimensional space . A right-hand glove could be put on a left hand if it could be to cover one another has nothing to do with it . completely congruent . And the fact that they cannot be made them out of this space . The right and left hand are in fact aand bcannot be made to cover one another without moving even in one-dimensional space ; where the two congruent figures be made to cover one another already exists in the plane , and 6 . 36111 The Kantian problem of the right and left hand which cannot occurrence of the other . this as the cause of the occurrence of the one and of the non- asymmetry . And if there is such an asymmetry , we can regard to describe one of the two events unless there is some sort of rather than the other , it is really a matter of our being unable can occur , because there is no cause why the one should occur that neither of two events which mutually exclude one another ) It is exactly analogous for space . When , for example , we say only possible if we support ourselves on another process . Hence the description of the temporal sequence of events is the movement of the chronometer ) . there is no such thing—but only with another process say , with 6 . 3611 We cannot compare any process with the “passage of time”— nexions are thinkable . 6 . 361 In the terminology of Hertz we might say : Only uniform con- But that can clearly not be said : it shows itself . TRACTATUS LOGICO-PHILOSOPHICUS 87 is no value—and if there were , it would be of no value . everything is as it is and happens as it does happen . In it there 6 . 41 The sense of the world must lie outside the world . In the world 6 . 4 All propositions are of equal value . at the same time , is a contradiction . sertion that a point in the visual field has two different colours ositions can neither be a tautology nor a contradiction . The as- It is clear that the logical product of two elementary prop- time cannot be identical . in two places , i . e . that particles in different places at the same time have two velocities , i . e . that at the same time it cannot be ics . Somewhat as follows : That a particle cannot at the same Let us consider how this contradiction presents itself in phys- structure of colour . impossible , logically impossible , for it is excluded by the logical 6 . 3751 For two colours , e . g . to be at one place in the visual field , is impossibility . 6 . 375 As there is only a logical necessity , so there is only a logical assumed physical connexion itself we could not again will . between will and world , which would guarantee this , and the be , so to speak , a favour of fate , for there is no logical connexion 6 . 374 Even if everything we wished were to happen , this would only 6 . 373 The world is independent of my will . explained . in the modern system it should appear as though everything were clearer , in so far as they recognized one clear conclusion , whereas And they both are right and wrong . But the ancients were able , as did the ancients at God and Fate . 6 . 372 So people stop short at natural laws as at something unassail- natural phenomena . illusion that the so-called laws of nature are the explanations of 6 . 371 At the basis of the whole modern view of the world lies the pened does not exist . There is only logical necessity . 6 . 37 A necessity for one thing to happen because another has hap- means that we do not know whether it will rise . 6 . 36311 That the sun will rise to-morrow , is an hypothesis ; and that TRACTATUS LOGICO-PHILOSOPHICUS 88 but timelessness , then he lives eternally who lives in the present . If by eternity is understood not endless temporal duration 6 . 4311 Death is not an event of life . Death is not lived through . 6 . 431 As in death , too , the world does not change , but ceases . unhappy . The world of the happy is quite another than that of the must so to speak wax or wane as a whole . In brief , the world must thereby become quite another . It expressed in language . limits of the world , not the facts ; not the things that can be 6 . 43 If good or bad willing changes the world , it can only change the ogy . And the will as a phenomenon is only of interest to psychol- 6 . 423 Of the will as the bearer of the ethical we cannot speak . acceptable , and the punishment something unacceptable . And this is clear also that the reward must be something ethical punishment , but this must lie in the action itself . of the question . There must be some sort of ethical reward and be events . For there must be something right in that formulation must therefore be irrelevant . At least these consequences will not ordinary sense . This question as to the consequences of an action ethics has nothing to do with punishment and reward in the shalt ” is : And what if I do not do it . But it is clear that 6 . 422 The first thought in setting up an ethical law of the form “thou Ethics and æsthetics are one . Ethics are transcendental . 6 . 421 It is clear that ethics cannot be expressed . Propositions cannot express anything higher . 6 . 42 Hence also there can be no ethical propositions . It must lie outside the world . otherwise this would again be accidental . What makes it non-accidental cannot lie in the world , for cidental . happening and being-so . For all happening and being-so is ac- If there is a value which is of value , it must lie outside all TRACTATUS LOGICO-PHILOSOPHICUS 89 Is not this the reason why men to whom after long doubting this problem . 6 . 521 The solution of the problem of life is seen in the vanishing of there is then no question left , and just this is the answer . the problems of life have still not been touched at all . Of course 6 . 52 We feel that even if all possible scientific questions be answered , can be said . only where there is an answer , and this only where something For doubt can only exist where there is a question ; a question doubt where a question cannot be asked . 6 . 51 Scepticism is not irrefutable , but palpably senseless , if it would If a question can be put at all , then it can also be answered . The riddle does not exist . not be expressed . 6 . 5 For an answer which cannot be expressed the question too can- feeling . The feeling of the world as a limited whole is the mystical plation as a limited whole . 6 . 45 The contemplation of the world sub specie aeterni is its contem- 6 . 44 Not how the world is , is the mystical , but that it is . 6 . 4321 The facts all belong only to the task and not to its performance . God does not reveal himself in the world . 6 . 432 How the world is , is completely indifferent for what is higher . solved . It is not problems of natural science which have to be and time lies outside space and time . as our present one ? The solution of the riddle of life in space fact that I survive for ever ? Is this eternal life not as enigmatic what we always tried to make it do . Is a riddle solved by the teed , but this assumption in the first place will not do for us eternal survival also after death , is not only in no way guaran- 6 . 4312 The temporal immortality of the soul of man , that is to say , its limit . Our life is endless in the way that our visual field is without TRACTATUS LOGICO-PHILOSOPHICUS 90 7 Whereof one cannot speak , thereof one must be silent . rightly . He must surmount these propositions ; then he sees the world away the ladder , after he has climbed up on it . through them , on them , over them . He must so to speak throw me finally recognizes them as senseless , when he has climbed out 6 . 54 My propositions are elucidatory in this way : he who understands correct method . were teaching him philosophy—but it would be the only strictly satisfying to the other—he would not have the feeling that we certain signs in his propositions . This method would be un- ical , to demonstrate to him that he had given no meaning to always , when someone else wished to say something metaphys- i . e . something that has nothing to do with philosophy : and then except what can be said , i . e . the propositions of natural science , 6 . 53 The right method of philosophy would be this . To say nothing mystical . 6 . 522 There is indeed the inexpressible . This shows itself ; it is the sense consisted ? ) the sense of life became clear , could not then say wherein this TRACTATUS LOGICO-PHILOSOPHICUS 91 Möglichen zurückgeblieben zu sein . Einfach darum , weil meine Kraft zur auf den Kopf getroffen ist . —Hier bin ich mir bewusst , weit hinter dem grösser sein , je besser die Gedanken ausgedrückt sind . Je mehr der Nagel darin , dass in ihr Gedanken ausgedrückt sind , und dieser Wert wird umso Wenn diese Arbeit einen Wert hat , so besteht er in Zweierlei . Erstens Teil der Anregung zu meinen Gedanken schulde . und den Arbeiten meines Freundes Herrn Bertrand Russell einen grossen Nur das will ich erwähnen , dass ich den grossartigen Werken Freges was ich gedacht habe , vor mir schon ein anderer gedacht hat . darum gebe ich auch keine Quellen an , weil es mir gleichgültig ist , ob das macht im Einzelnen überhaupt nicht den Anspruch auf Neuheit ; und menfallen , will ich nicht beurteilen . Ja , was ich hier geschrieben habe Wieweit meine Bestrebungen mit denen anderer Philosophen zusam- was jenseits der Grenze liegt , wird einfach Unsinn sein . Die Grenze wird also nur in der Sprache gezogen werden können und lässt ) . denken können wir müssten also denken können , was sich nicht denken Denken eine Grenze zu ziehen , müssten wir beide Seiten dieser Grenze nicht dem Denken , sondern dem Ausdruck der Gedanken : Denn um dem Das Buch will also dem Denken eine Grenze ziehen , oder vielmehr— schweigen . sich klar sagen ; und wovon man nicht reden kann , darüber muss man Buches etwa in die Worte fassen : Was sich überhaupt sagen lässt , lässt nis der Logik unserer Sprache beruht . Man könnte den ganzen Sinn des glaube—dass die Fragestellung dieser Probleme auf dem Missverständ- Das Buch behandelt die philosophischen Probleme und zeigt—wie ich wenn es Einem , der es mit Verständnis liest Vergnügen bereitete . mal gedacht hat . —Es ist also kein Lehrbuch . —Sein Zweck wäre erreicht , darin ausgedrückt sind—oder doch ähnliche Gedanken—schon selbst ein- Dieses Buch wird vielleicht nur der verstehen , der die Gedanken , die VORWORT Logisch-Philosophische Abhandlung 92 Wien , 1918 . L . W . wie wenig damit getan ist , dass diese Probleme gelöst sind . irre , so besteht nun der Wert dieser Arbeit zweitens darin , dass sie zeigt , Wesentlichen endgültig gelöst zu haben . Und wenn ich mich hierin nicht unantastbar und definitiv . Ich bin also der Meinung , die Probleme im Dagegen scheint mir die Wah r h e i t der hier mitgeteilten Gedanken besser machen . Bewältigung der Aufgabe zu gering ist . —Mögen andere kommen und es 93 Bemerkungen zum Satze No . n . m ; und so weiter . n . 1 , n . 2 , n . 3 , etc . , sind Bemerkungen zum Satze No . n ; die Sätze n . m1 , n . m2 , etc . der Sätze an , den Nachdruck , der auf ihnen in meiner Darstellung liegt . Die Sätze ∗Die Decimalzahlen als Nummern der einzelnen Sätze deuten das logische Gewicht muss dies schon in ihnen liegen . Wenn die Dinge in Sachverhalten vorkommen können , so sich bestehen könnte , nachträglich eine Sachlage passen würde . 2 . 0121 Es erschiene gleichsam als Zufall , wenn dem Ding , das allein für im Ding bereits präjudiziert sein . vorkommen ka n n , so muss die Möglichkeit des Sachverhaltes 2 . 012 In der Logik ist nichts zufällig : Wenn das Ding im Sachverhalt sein zu können . 2 . 011 Es ist dem Ding wesentlich , der Bestandteil eines Sachverhaltes Dingen . 2 . 01 Der Sachverhalt ist eine Verbindung von Gegenständen . Sachen , ten . 2 Was der Fall ist , die Tatsache , ist das Bestehen von Sachverhal- gleich bleiben . 1 . 21 Eines kann der Fall sein oder nicht der Fall sein und alles übrige 1 . 2 Die Welt zerfällt in Tatsachen . 1 . 13 Die Tatsachen im logischen Raum sind die Welt . und auch , was alles nicht der Fall ist . 1 . 12 Denn , die Gesamtheit der Tatsachen bestimmt , was der Fall ist es a l l e Tatsachen sind . 1 . 11 Die Welt ist durch die Tatsachen bestimmt und dadurch , dass 1 . 1 Die Welt ist die Gesamtheit der Tatsachen , nicht der Dinge . 1 Die Welt ist alles , was der Fall ist . ∗ 94 e i n e Härte usw . Der Ton muss e i ne Höhe haben , der Gegenstand des Tastsinnes Farbe muss er haben : er hat sozusagen den Farbenraum um sich . Der Fleck im Gesichtsfeld muss zwar nicht rot sein , aber eine Der Raumpunkt ist eine Argumentstelle . 2 . 0131 Der räumliche Gegenstand muss im unendlichen Raume liegen . Ding ohne den Raum . halte . Diesen Raum kann ich mir leer denken , nicht aber das 2 . 013 Jedes Ding ist , gleichsam , in einem Raume möglicher Sachver- l i ch e n Sachverhalte gegeben . 2 . 0124 Sind alle Gegenstände gegeben , so sind damit auch alle m ö g - nen . externen—aber ich muss alle seine internen Eigenschaften ken- 2 . 01231 Um einen Gegenstand zu kennen , muss ich zwar nicht seine werden . Es kann nicht nachträglich eine neue Möglichkeit gefunden liegen . Jede solche Möglichkeit muss in der Natur des Gegenstandes Möglichkeiten seines Vorkommens in Sachverhalten . 2 . 0123 Wenn ich den Gegenstand kenne , so kenne ich auch sämtliche verschiedenen Weisen auftreten , allein und im Satz . der Unselbständigkeit . Es ist unmöglich , dass Worte in zwei eine Form des Zusammenhangs mit dem Sachverhalt , eine Form lagen vorkommen kann , aber diese Form der Selbständigkeit ist 2 . 0122 Das Ding ist selbständig , insofern es in allen m ö g l i ch en Sach- ke i t dieses Verbandes denken . denken kann , so kann ich ihn nicht ausserhalb der M ö g l i ch - Wenn ich mir den Gegenstand im Verbande des Sachverhalts Möglichkeit seiner Verbindung mit anderen denken . können , so können wir uns k e i n e n Gegenstand ausserhalb der serhalb des Raumes , zeitliche nicht ausserhalb der Zeit denken Wie wir uns räumliche Gegenstände überhaupt nicht aus- sachen . delt von jeder Möglichkeit und alle Möglichkeiten sind ihre Tat- Etwas Logisches kann nicht nur-möglich sein . Die Logik han- LOGISCH-PHILOSOPHISCHE ABHANDLUNG 95 es nicht hervorheben , denn sonst ist es eben hervorgehoben . Denn , ist das Ding durch nichts hervorgehoben , so kann ich zu zeigen . haben , dann ist es überhaupt unmöglich auf eines von ihnen mehrere Dinge , die ihre sämtlichen Eigenschaften gemeinsam deren herausheben , und darauf hinweisen ; oder aber , es gibt kann man es ohneweiteres durch eine Beschreibung aus den an- 2 . 02331 Entweder ein Ding hat Eigenschaften , die kein anderes hat , dann durch unterschieden , dass sie verschieden sind . sehen von ihren externen Eigenschaften—von einander nur da- 2 . 0233 Zwei Gegenstände von der gleichen logischen Form sind—abge- 2 . 0232 Beiläufig gesprochen : Die Gegenstände sind farblos . gebildet . Sätze dargestellt—erst durch die Konfiguration der Gegenstände len Eigenschaften bestimmen . Denn diese werden erst durch die 2 . 0231 Die Substanz der Welt ka n n nur eine Form und keine materiel- 2 . 023 Diese feste Form besteht eben aus den Gegenständen . gemein haben muss . schieden gedachte Welt Etwas—eine Form—mit der wirklichen 2 . 022 Es ist offenbar , dass auch eine von der wirklichen noch so ver- zu entwerfen . 2 . 0212 Es wäre dann unmöglich , ein Bild der Welt wahr oder falsch ) davon abhängen , ob ein anderer Satz wahr ist . 2 . 0211 Hätte die Welt keine Substanz , so würde , ob ein Satz Sinn hat , sie nicht zusammengesetzt sein . 2 . 021 Die Gegenstände bilden die Substanz der Welt . Darum können Komplexe vollständig beschreiben . deren Bestandteile und in diejenigen Sätze zerlegen , welche die 2 . 0201 Jede Aussage über Komplexe lässt sich in eine Aussage über 2 . 02 Der Gegenstand ist einfach . Form des Gegenstandes . 2 . 0141 Die Möglichkeit seines Vorkommens in Sachverhalten , ist die 2 . 014 Die Gegenstände enthalten die Möglichkeit aller Sachlagen . LOGISCH-PHILOSOPHISCHE ABHANDLUNG 96 2 . 063 Die gesamte Wirklichkeit ist die Welt . schlossen werden . nicht auf das Bestehen oder Nichtbestehen eines anderen ge- 2 . 062 Aus dem Bestehen oder Nichtbestehen eines Sachverhaltes kann 2 . 061 Die Sachverhalte sind von einander unabhängig . sitive , das Nichtbestehen eine negative Tatsache . Das Bestehen von Sachverhalten nennen wir auch eine po- lichkeit . 2 . 06 Das Bestehen und Nichtbestehen von Sachverhalten ist die Wirk- welche Sachverhalte nicht bestehen . 2 . 05 Die Gesamtheit der bestehenden Sachverhalte bestimmt auch , 2 . 04 Die Gesamtheit der bestehenden Sachverhalte ist die Welt . verhalte . 2 . 034 Die Struktur der Tatsache besteht aus den Strukturen der Sach- 2 . 033 Die Form ist die Möglichkeit der Struktur . menhängen , ist die Struktur des Sachverhaltes . 2 . 032 Die Art und Weise , wie die Gegenstände im Sachverhalt zusam- Art und Weise zueinander . 2 . 031 Im Sachverhalt verhalten sich die Gegenstände in bestimmter der einer Kette . 2 . 03 Im Sachverhalt hängen die Gegenstände ineinander , wie die Glie- 2 . 0272 Die Konfiguration der Gegenstände bildet den Sachverhalt . das Wechselnde , Unbeständige . 2 . 0271 Der Gegenstand ist das Feste , Bestehende ; die Konfiguration ist 2 . 027 Das Feste , das Bestehende und der Gegenstand sind Eins . geben . 2 . 026 Nur wenn es Gegenstände gibt , kann es eine feste Form der Welt de . 2 . 0251 Raum , Zeit und Farbe Färbigkeit ) sind Formen der Gegenstän- 2 . 025 Sie ist Form und Inhalt . besteht . 2 . 024 Die Substanz ist das , was unabhängig von dem was der Fall ist , LOGISCH-PHILOSOPHISCHE ABHANDLUNG 97 eine überhaupt ein Bild des anderen sein kann . 2 . 161 In Bild und Abgebildetem muss etwas identisch sein , damit das gemeinsam haben . 2 . 16 Die Tatsache muss um Bild zu sein , etwas mit dem Abgebildeten mit denen das Bild die Wirklichkeit berührt . 2 . 1515 Diese Zuordnungen sind gleichsam die Fühler der Bildelemente , mente des Bildes und der Sachen . 2 . 1514 Die abbildende Beziehung besteht aus den Zuordnungen der Ele- abbildende Beziehung , die es zum Bild macht . 2 . 1513 Nach dieser Auffassung gehört also zum Bilde auch noch die messenden Gegenstand . 2 . 15121 Nur die äussersten Punkte der Teilstriche b e r ü h r e n den zu 2 . 1512 Es ist wie ein Massstab an die Wirklichkeit angelegt . ihr . 2 . 1511 Das Bild ist so mit der Wirklichkeit verknüpft ; es reicht bis zu so zu einander verhalten , wie die Elemente des Bildes . 2 . 151 Die Form der Abbildung ist die Möglichkeit , dass sich die Dinge Struktur und ihre Möglichkeit seine Form der Abbildung . Dieser Zusammenhang der Elemente des Bildes heisse seine einander verhalten . se zu einander verhalten stellt vor , dass sich die Sachen so zu 2 . 15 Dass sich die Elemente des Bildes in bestimmter Art und Wei- 2 . 141 Das Bild ist eine Tatsache . Art und Weise zu einander verhalten . 2 . 14 Das Bild besteht darin , dass sich seine Elemente in bestimmter 2 . 131 Die Elemente des Bildes vertreten im Bild die Gegenstände . des . 2 . 13 Den Gegenständen entsprechen im Bilde die Elemente des Bil- 2 . 12 Das Bild ist ein Modell der Wirklichkeit . und Nichtbestehen von Sachverhalten vor . 2 . 11 Das Bild stellt die Sachlage im logischen Raume , das Bestehen 2 . 1 Wir machen uns Bilder der Tatsachen . LOGISCH-PHILOSOPHISCHE ABHANDLUNG 98 2 . 221 Was das Bild darstellt , ist sein Sinn . Wahr- oder Falschheit , durch die Form der Abbildung . 2 . 22 Das Bild stellt dar , was es darstellt , unabhängig von seiner richtig oder unrichtig , wahr oder falsch . 2 . 21 Das Bild stimmt mit der Wirklichkeit überein oder nicht ; es ist 2 . 203 Das Bild enthält die Möglichkeit der Sachlage , die es darstellt . 2 . 202 Das Bild stellt eine mögliche Sachlage im logischen Raume dar . des Bestehens und Nichtbestehens von Sachverhalten darstellt . 2 . 201 Das Bild bildet die Wirklichkeit ab , indem es eine Möglichkeit bildung gemein . 2 . 2 Das Bild hat mit dem Abgebildeten die logische Form der Ab- 2 . 19 Das logische Bild kann die Welt abbilden . Bild ein räumliches . 2 . 182 Jedes Bild ist a u ch ein logisches . Dagegen ist z . B . nicht jedes das logische Bild . 2 . 181 Ist die Form der Abbildung die logische Form , so heisst das Bild Wirklichkeit . bilden zu können , ist die logische Form , das ist , die Form der mein haben muss , um sie überhaupt—richtig oder falsch—ab- 2 . 18 Was jedes Bild , welcher Form immer , mit der Wirklichkeit ge- stellung stellen . 2 . 174 Das Bild kann sich aber nicht ausserhalb seiner Form der Dar- jekt richtig oder falsch dar . ist seine Form der Darstellung ) , darum stellt das Bild sein Ob- 2 . 173 Das Bild stellt sein Objekt von ausserhalb dar sein Standpunkt es weist sie auf . 2 . 172 Seine Form der Abbildung aber , kann das Bild nicht abbilden ; etc . Das räumliche Bild alles Räumliche , das farbige alles Farbige , 2 . 171 Das Bild kann jede Wirklichkeit abbilden , deren Form es hat . nen , ist seine Form der Abbildung . auf seine Art und Weise—richtig oder falsch—abbilden zu kön- 2 . 17 Was das Bild mit der Wirklichkeit gemein haben muss , um sie LOGISCH-PHILOSOPHISCHE ABHANDLUNG 99 3 . 11 Wir benützen das sinnlich wahrnehmbare Zeichen Laut- oder 3 . 1 Im Satz drückt sich der Gedanke sinnlich wahrnehmbar aus . Wahrheit zu erkennen wäre . wenn aus dem Gedanken selbst ohne Vergleichsobjekt ) seine 3 . 05 Nur so könnten wir a priori wissen , dass ein Gedanke wahr ist , keit seine Wahrheit bedingte . 3 . 04 Ein a priori richtiger Gedanke wäre ein solcher , dessen Möglich- Geometrie zuwiderliefe . den Gesetzen der Physik , aber keinen , der den Gesetzen der 3 . 0321 Wohl können wir einen Sachverhalt räumlich darstellen , welcher nicht existiert . darstellen ; oder die Koordinaten eines Punktes angeben , welcher zen des Raumes widersprechende Figur durch ihre Koordinaten kann man ebensowenig , wie in der Geometrie eine den Geset- 3 . 032 Etwas „der Logik widersprechendes“ in der Sprache darstellen , lich von einer „unlogischen“ Welt nicht s a g e n , wie sie aussähe . was den logischen Gesetzen zuwider wäre . —Wir könnten näm- 3 . 031 Man sagte einmal , dass Gott alles schaffen könne , nur nichts , denken müssten . 3 . 03 Wir können nichts Unlogisches denken , weil wir sonst unlogisch Was denkbar ist , ist auch möglich . 3 . 02 Der Gedanke enthält die Möglichkeit der Sachlage die er denkt . 3 . 01 Die Gesamtheit der wahren Gedanken sind ein Bild der Welt . von ihm machen . 3 . 001 „Ein Sachverhalt ist denkbar“ heisst : Wir können uns ein Bild 3 Das logische Bild der Tatsachen ist der Gedanke . 2 . 225 Ein a priori wahres Bild gibt es nicht . ist . 2 . 224 Aus dem Bild allein ist nicht zu erkennen , ob es wahr oder falsch es mit der Wirklichkeit vergleichen . 2 . 223 Um zu erkennen , ob das Bild wahr oder falsch ist , müssen wir nes mit der Wirklichkeit , besteht seine Wahrheit oder Falschheit . 2 . 222 In der Übereinstimmung oder Nichtübereinstimmung seines Sin- LOGISCH-PHILOSOPHISCHE ABHANDLUNG 100 den Sinn des Satzes aus . Die gegenseitige räumliche Lage dieser Dinge drückt dann Stühlen , Büchern ) zusammengesetzt denken . aus Schriftzeichen , aus räumlichen Gegenständen etwa Tischen , 3 . 1431 Sehr klar wird das Wesen des Satzzeichens , wenn wir es uns , statt setzten Namen nannte . So war es möglich , dass Frege den Satz einen zusammenge- wesentlich verschieden aus vom Wort . Denn im gedruckten Satz z . B . sieht das Satzzeichen nicht liche Ausdrucksform der Schrift oder des Druckes verschleiert . 3 . 143 Dass das Satzzeichen eine Tatsache ist , wird durch die gewöhn- Namen kann es nicht . 3 . 142 Nur Tatsachen können einen Sinn ausdrücken , eine Klasse von Der Satz ist artikuliert . ma kein Gemisch von Tönen . 3 . 141 Der Satz ist kein Wörtergemisch . — ( Wie das musikalische The- Das Satzzeichen ist eine Tatsache . halten . Wörter , in ihm auf bestimmte Art und Weise zu einander ver- 3 . 14 Das Satzzeichen besteht darin , dass sich seine Elemente , die sen Inhalt . Im Satz ist die Form seines Sinnes enthalten , aber nicht des- zes . „Der Inhalt des Satzes“ heisst der Inhalt des sinnvollen Sat- die Möglichkeit ihn auszudrücken . Im Satz ist also sein Sinn noch nicht enthalten , wohl aber Also die Möglichkeit des Projizierten , aber nicht dieses selbst . Projizierte . 3 . 13 Zum Satz gehört alles , was zur Projektion gehört ; aber nicht das projektiven Beziehung zur Welt . ich das Satzzeichen . Und der Satz ist das Satzzeichen in seiner 3 . 12 Das Zeichen , durch welches wir den Gedanken ausdrücken , nenne Die Projektionsmethode ist das Denken des Satz-Sinnes . Sachlage . Schriftzeichen etc . des Satzes als Projektion der möglichen LOGISCH-PHILOSOPHISCHE ABHANDLUNG 101 den . einfaches Symbol kann durch eine Definition ausgedrückt wer- Die Zusammenfassung des Symbols eines Komplexes in ein bild . bestimmt . Die Allgemeinheitsbezeichnung e n t h ä l t ja ein Ur- kommt . Wir w i s s e n , durch diesen Satz ist noch nicht alles aus einer Unbestimmtheit in den Sätzen sehen , worin es vor- Dass ein Satzelement einen Komplex bezeichnet , kann man nicht existiert , nicht unsinnig , sondern einfach falsch sein . welchem von einem Komplex die Rede ist , wird , wenn dieser sein , und diese wird stimmen oder nicht stimmen . Der Satz , in Der Komplex kann nur durch seine Beschreibung gegeben ziehung zum Satze , der von dessen Bestandteil handelt . 3 . 24 Der Satz , welcher vom Komplex handelt , steht in interner Be- derung der Bestimmtheit des Sinnes . 3 . 23 Die Forderung der Möglichkeit der einfachen Zeichen ist die For- es ist . ich nicht . Ein Satz kann nur sagen , w i e ein Ding ist , nicht wa s Ich kann nur v o n ihnen sprechen , s i e a u s s p r e ch e n kann 3 . 221 Die Gegenstände kann ich nur n e n n e n . Zeichen vertreten sie . 3 . 22 Der Name vertritt im Satz den Gegenstand . spricht die Konfiguration der Gegenstände in der Sachlage . 3 . 21 Der Konfiguration der einfachen Zeichen im Satzzeichen ent- Bedeutung . „A“ ist dasselbe Zeichen wie „A“ . 3 . 203 Der Name bedeutet den Gegenstand . Der Gegenstand ist seine 3 . 202 Die im Satze angewandten einfachen Zeichen heissen Namen . ständig analysiert“ . 3 . 201 Diese Elemente nenne ich „einfache Zeichen“ und den Satz „voll- ständen des Gedankens Elemente des Satzzeichens entsprechen . 3 . 2 Im Satze kann der Gedanke so ausgedrückt sein , dass den Gegen- Namen gleichen Punkten , Sätze Pfeilen , sie haben Sinn . 3 . 144 Sachlagen kann man beschreiben , nicht b e n e n n e n . hung zu „b“ steht , sagt , d a s s aRb . hung Rzu bsteht“ , sondern : D a s s „a“ in einer gewissen Bezie- 3 . 1432 Nicht : „Das komplexe Zeichen ‚aRb‘ sagt , dass ain der Bezie- LOGISCH-PHILOSOPHISCHE ABHANDLUNG 102 Werte die Sätze sind , die den Ausdruck enthalten . 3 . 313 Der Ausdruck wird also durch eine Variable dargestellt , deren alles übrige va r i a b e l sein . Und zwar wird in dieser Form der Ausdruck ko n s t a n t und die er charakterisiert . 3 . 312 Er wird also dargestellt durch die allgemeine Form der Sätze , Merkmal einer Klasse von Sätzen . er vorkommen kann . Er ist das gemeinsame charakteristische 3 . 311 Der Ausdruck setzt die Formen aller Sätze voraus , in welchen Der Ausdruck kennzeichnet eine Form und einen Inhalt . Sätze miteinander gemein haben können . Ausdruck ist alles , für den Sinn des Satzes wesentliche , was Der Satz selbst ist ein Ausdruck . einen Ausdruck ein Symbol ) . 3 . 31 Jeden Teil des Satzes , der seinen Sinn charakterisiert , nenne ich ein Name Bedeutung . 3 . 3 Nur der Satz hat Sinn ; nur im Zusammenhange des Satzes hat deutungen dieser Zeichen bereits bekannt sind . enthalten . Sie können also nur verstanden werden , wenn die Be- erklärt werden . Erläuterungen sind Sätze , welche die Urzeichen 3 . 263 Die Bedeutungen von Urzeichen können durch Erläuterungen Anwendung aus . re Anwendung . Was die Zeichen verschlucken , das spricht ihre 3 . 262 Was in den Zeichen nicht zum Ausdruck kommt , das zeigt ih- Kein Zeichen , welches allein , selbständig eine Bedeutung hat . Namen ka n n man nicht durch Definitionen auseinanderlegen . finiertes , können nicht auf dieselbe Art und Weise bezeichnen . Zwei Zeichen , ein Urzeichen , und ein durch Urzeichen de- welche es definiert wurde ; und die Definitionen weisen den Weg . 3 . 261 Jedes definierte Zeichen bezeichnet ü b e r jene Zeichen , durch ein Urzeichen . 3 . 26 Der Name ist durch keine Definition weiter zu zergliedern : er ist er ausdrückt : Der Satz ist artikuliert . 3 . 251 Der Satz drückt auf bestimmte , klar angebbare Weise aus , was 3 . 25 Es gibt eine und nur eine vollständige Analyse des Satzes . LOGISCH-PHILOSOPHISCHE ABHANDLUNG 103 zeigen , dass wir sie mit demselben Zeichen , aber durch zwei 3 . 322 Es kann nie das gemeinsame Merkmal zweier Gegenstände an- bezeichnen dann auf verschiedene Art und Weise . zeichen oder Lautzeichen etc . miteinander gemein haben—sie 3 . 321 Zwei verschiedene Symbole können also das Zeichen Schrift- 3 . 32 Das Zeichen ist das sinnlich Wahrnehmbare am Symbol . ihm enthaltenen Ausdrücke auf . 3 . 318 Den Satz fasse ich—wie Frege und Russell—als Funktion der in Wie die Beschreibung der Sätze geschieht , ist unwesentlich . über das Bezeichnete aussagt . eine Beschreibung von Symbolen ist und nichts Und nu r dies ist der Festsetzung wesentlich , d a s s s i e nu r Bedeutung handeln . Die Festsetzung wird also nur von Symbolen , nicht von deren Die Festsetzung ist eine Beschreibung dieser Sätze . d e r S ä t z e , deren gemeinsames Merkmal die Variable ist . 3 . 317 Die Festsetzung der Werte der Satzvariablen ist die A n g a b e Die Festsetzung der Werte i st die Variable . 3 . 316 Welche Werte die Satzvariable annehmen darf , wird festgesetzt . Form—einem logischen Urbild . noch von der Natur des Satzes . Sie entspricht einer logischen se aber ist nun von keiner Übereinkunft abhängig , sondern nur in Variable , so gibt es nun noch immer eine solche Klasse . Die- alle jene Zeichen , deren Bedeutung willkürlich bestimmt wurde , einkunft , mit Teilen jenes Satzes meinen . Verwandeln wir aber allgemeinen noch davon ab , was wir , nach willkürlicher Über- so entstandenen variablen Satzes sind . Diese Klasse hängt im so gibt es eine Klasse von Sätzen , welche sämtlich Werte des 3 . 315 Verwandeln wir einen Bestandteil eines Satzes in eine Variable , Auch der variable Name . sich als Satzvariable auffassen . 3 . 314 Der Ausdruck hat nur im Satz Bedeutung . Jede Variable lässt Ich nenne eine solche Variable „Satzvariable“ . druck zum Satz . Im Grenzfall wird die Variable zur Konstanten , der Aus- LOGISCH-PHILOSOPHISCHE ABHANDLUNG 104 dann hat es auch Bedeutung . Wenn sich alles so verhält als hätte ein Zeichen Bedeutung , Das ist der Sinn der Devise Occams . 3 . 328 Wird ein Zeichen n i c ht g e b r a u c ht , so ist es bedeutungslos . wendung zusammen eine logische Form . 3 . 327 Das Zeichen bestimmt erst mit seiner logisch-syntaktischen Ver- sinnvollen Gebrauch achten . 3 . 326 Um das Symbol am Zeichen zu erkennen , muss man auf den che , die allerdings noch nicht alle Fehler ausschliesst . Die Begriffsschrift Frege’s und Russell’s ist eine solche Spra- Grammatik—der logischen Syntax—gehorcht . Art verwendet . Eine Zeichensprache also , die der l o g i s ch e n auf verschiedene Art bezeichnen , nicht äusserlich auf die gleiche gleiche Zeichen in verschiedenen Symbolen , und Zeichen , welche sprache verwenden , welche sie ausschliesst , indem sie nicht das 3 . 325 Um diesen Irrtümern zu entgehen , müssen wir eine Zeichen- die ganze Philosophie voll ist ) . 3 . 324 So entstehen leicht die fundamentalsten Verwechslungen deren schiedene Symbole . te nicht einfach verschiedene Bedeutung , sondern es sind ve r - nenname , das letzte ein Eigenschaftswort ist—haben diese Wor- Im Satze „Grün ist grün“—wo das erste Wort ein Perso- reden von E t wa s , aber auch davon , dass e t wa s geschieht . ves Zeitwort wie „gehen“ ; „identisch“ als Eigenschaftswort ; wir chen und als Ausdruck der Existenz ; „existieren“ als intransiti- So erscheint das Wort „ist“ als Kopula , als Gleichheitszei- gleichen Weise im Satze angewandt werden . auf verschiedene Art und Weise bezeichnen , äusserlich in der verschiedenen Symbolen angehört— , oder , dass zwei Wörter , die dasselbe Wort auf verschiedene Art und Weise bezeichnet—also 3 . 323 In der Umgangssprache kommt es ungemein häufig vor , dass Bezeichnung . ne Zeichen wählen , und wo bliebe dann das Gemeinsame in der Zeichen ist ja willkürlich . Man könnte also auch zwei verschiede- verschiedene B e z e i c h nu n g s we i s e n bezeichnen . Denn das LOGISCH-PHILOSOPHISCHE ABHANDLUNG 105 sam haben . was alle Symbole , die denselben Zweck erfüllen können , gemein- Und ebenso ist allgemein das Wesentliche am Symbol das , den gleichen Sinn ausdrücken können , gemeinsam ist . 3 . 341 Das Wesentliche am Satz ist also das , was allen Sätzen , welche welche allein den Satz befähigen , seinen Sinn auszudrücken . vorbringung des Satzzeichens herrühren . Wesentlich diejenigen , Zufällig sind die Züge , die von der besonderen Art der Her- 3 . 34 Der Satz besitzt wesentliche und zufällige Züge . hen , wenn man nur weiss , wie ein jedes Zeichen bezeichnet . 3 . 334 Die Regeln der logischen Syntax müssen sich von selbst verste- Hiermit erledigt sich Russell’s Paradox . „ ( ∃φ ) F ( φu ) . φu =F u“ . Dies wird sofort klar , wenn wir statt „F ( F ( u ) “ schreiben allein nichts bezeichnet . sam ist den beiden Funktionen nur der Buchstabe „F“ , der aber hat die Form φ ( f x ) , die äussere , die Form φ ( fx ) . Gemein- Funktion Fverschiedene Bedeutungen haben , denn die innere und in diesem müssen die äussere Funktion Fund die innere genes Argument sein ; dann gäbe es also einen Satz : „F ( F ( fx ) “ Nehmen wir nämlich an , die Funktion F ( f x ) könnte ihr ei- hält und es sich nicht selbst enthalten kann . das Funktionszeichen bereits das Urbild seines Arguments ent- 3 . 333 Eine Funktion kann darum nicht ihr eigenes Argument sein , weil „Theory of types“ ) . chen nicht in sich selbst enthalten sein kann , das ist die ganze 3 . 332 Kein Satz kann etwas über sich selbst aussagen , weil das Satzzei- reden musste . Aufstellung der Zeichenregeln von der Bedeutung der Zeichen hinüber : Der Irrtum Russell’s zeigt sich darin , dass er bei der 3 . 331 Von dieser Bemerkung sehen wir in Russell’s „Theory of types“ die Beschreibung der Ausdrücke voraussetzen . von der B e d e u t u n g eines Zeichens die Rede wäre , sie darf n u r eine Rolle spielen ; sie muss sich aufstellen lassen , ohne dass dabei 3 . 33 In der logischen Syntax darf nie die Bedeutung eines Zeichens LOGISCH-PHILOSOPHISCHE ABHANDLUNG 106 gische Ort . 3 . 41 Das Satzzeichen und die logischen Koordinaten : Das ist der lo- allein verbürgt , durch die Existenz des sinnvollen Satzes . dieses logischen Ortes ist durch die Existenz der Bestandteile 3 . 4 Der Satz bestimmt einen Ort im logischen Raum . Die Existenz eine andere wäre . willkürlich auf , so dass etwa seine Auflösung in jedem Satzgefüge 3 . 3442 Das Zeichen des Komplexes löst sich auch bei der Analyse nicht kann . spezielle mögliche Notation uns allgemeine Aufschlüsse geben Hiermit ist die Art und Weise gekennzeichnet , wie eine „poder q“ ) ersetzen lassen . alle—z . B . —durch die Notation von „∼p“ „nicht p“ ) und „p∨q“ heitsfunktionen so ausdrücken : Es ist ihnen gemeinsam , dass sich 3 . 3441 Man kann z . B . das Gemeinsame aller Notationen für die Wahr- zufolge ersetzt werden kann . Symbole , durch die das erste den Regeln der logischen Syntax 3 . 344 Das , was am Symbol bezeichnet , ist das Gemeinsame aller jener alle gemeinsam haben . dere nach solchen Regeln übersetzen lassen : D i e s ist , was sie eine andere . Jede richtige Zeichensprache muss sich in jede an- 3 . 343 Definitionen sind Regeln der Übersetzung von einer Sprache in Wesen der Welt . Möglichkeit jedes Einzelnen gibt uns einen Aufschluss über das Das Einzelne erweist sich immer wieder als unwichtig , aber die weise ist . Und so verhält es sich in der Philosophie überhaupt : wichtig ist es immer , dass diese eine m ö g l i c h e Bezeichnungs- 3 . 3421 Eine besondere Bezeichnungsweise mag unwichtig sein , aber dem We s e n der Notation ab . haben , dann etwas anderes der Fall sein muss . Dies hängt von nicht willkürlich : Dass , we n n wir etwas willkürlich bestimmt 3 . 342 An unseren Notationen ist zwar etwas willkürlich , aber d a s ist zung für den Namen wesentlich ist . würde sich so successive ergeben , dass keinerlei Zusammenset- Symbole , die den Gegenstand bezeichnen , gemeinsam haben . Es 3 . 3411 Man könnte also sagen : Der eigentliche Name ist das , was alle LOGISCH-PHILOSOPHISCHE ABHANDLUNG 107 weniger identisch sei als das Schöne . Sie sind von der Art der Frage , ob das Gute mehr oder Sprachlogik nicht verstehen . gen und Sätze der Philosophen beruhen darauf , dass wir unsere ten , sondern nur ihre Unsinnigkeit feststellen . Die meisten Fra- Wir können daher Fragen dieser Art überhaupt nicht beantwor- ge geschrieben worden sind , sind nicht falsch , sondern unsinnig . 4 . 003 Die meisten Sätze und Fragen , welche über philosophische Din- Umgangssprache sind enorm kompliziert . Die stillschweigenden Abmachungen zum Verständnis der die Form des Körpers erkennen zu lassen . des Kleides nach ganz anderen Zwecken gebildet ist , als danach , bekleideten Gedankens schliessen kann ; weil die äussere Form man nach der äusseren Form des Kleides , nicht auf die Form des Die Sprache verkleidet den Gedanken . Und zwar so , dass bar zu entnehmen . Es ist menschenunmöglich , die Sprachlogik aus ihr unmittel- mus und nicht weniger kompliziert als dieser . Die Umgangssprache ist ein Teil des menschlichen Organis- zu wissen , wie die einzelnen Laute hervorgebracht werden . wie und was jedes Wort bedeutet . —Wie man auch spricht , ohne jeder Sinn ausdrücken lässt , ohne eine Ahnung davon zu haben , 4 . 002 Der Mensch besitzt die Fähigkeit Sprachen zu bauen , womit sich 4 . 001 Die Gesamtheit der Sätze ist die Sprache . 4 Der Gedanke ist der sinnvolle Satz . 3 . 5 Das angewandte , gedachte , Satzzeichen ist der Gedanke . schen Raum . Der Satz durchgreift den ganzen logischen Raum . Das logische Gerüst um das Bild herum bestimmt den logi- tion—eingeführt . das logische Produkt , etc . immer neue Elemente—in Koordina- Sonst würden durch die Verneinung , die logische Summe , gegeben sein . darf , so muss doch durch ihn schon der ganze logische Raum 3 . 42 Obwohl der Satz nur einen Ort des logischen Raumes bestimmen dass beide die Möglichkeit einer Existenz sind . 3 . 411 Der geometrische und der logische Ort stimmen darin überein , LOGISCH-PHILOSOPHISCHE ABHANDLUNG 108 aus der Linie auf der Grammophonplatte die Symphonie und der Partitur die Symphonie entnehmen kann , durch welche man 4 . 0141 Dass es eine allgemeine Regel gibt , durch die der Musiker aus ihre Lilien . Sie sind alle in gewissem Sinne Eins . Wie im Märchen die zwei Jünglinge , ihre zwei Pferde und Ihnen allen ist der logische Bau gemeinsam . steht . nen Beziehung zu einander , die zwischen Sprache und Welt be- schrift , die Schallwellen , stehen alle in jener abbildenden inter- 4 . 014 Die Grammophonplatte , der musikalische Gedanke , die Noten- ausdrücken sollen ; nur auf eine andere Art und Weise . Denn auch diese Unregelmässigkeiten bilden das ab , was sie Notenschrift ) n i c ht gestört wird . g e l m ä s s i g ke i t e n wie die Verwendung der und in der gen , so sehen wir , dass dieselbe durch s ch e i n b a r e U n r e - 4 . 013 Und wenn wir in das Wesentliche dieser Bildhaftigkeit eindrin- zeichneten . empfinden . Hier ist das Zeichen offenbar ein Gleichnis des Be- 4 . 012 Offenbar ist , dass wir einen Satz von der Form „aRb“ als Bild wöhnlichen Sinne als Bilder dessen , was sie darstellen . Und doch erweisen sich diese Zeichensprachen auch im ge- Buchstaben- ) Schrift kein Bild unserer Lautsprache . ten Blick kein Bild der Musik zu sein , und unsere Lautzeichen- der er handelt . Aber auch die Notenschrift scheint auf den ers- Papier gedruckt steht—kein Bild der Wirklichkeit zu sein , von 4 . 011 Auf den ersten Blick scheint der Satz—wie er etwa auf dem denken . Der Satz ist ein Modell der Wirklichkeit , so wie wir sie uns 4 . 01 Der Satz ist ein Bild der Wirklichkeit . sein muss . die scheinbare logische Form des Satzes nicht seine wirkliche Mauthners . Russell’s Verdienst ist es , gezeigt zu haben , dass 4 . 0031 Alle Philosophie ist „Sprachkritik“ . Allerdings nicht im Sinne eigentlich k e i n e Probleme sind . Und es ist nicht verwunderlich , dass die tiefsten Probleme LOGISCH-PHILOSOPHISCHE ABHANDLUNG 109 ist . Man kann ihn also verstehen , ohne zu wissen , ob er wahr wahr ist . 4 . 024 Einen Satz verstehen , heisst , wissen was der Fall ist , wenn er falschen Satz S c h l ü s s e z i e h e n . les Logische verhält , we n n er wahr ist . Man kann aus einem rüstes und darum kann man am Satz auch sehen , wie sich al- Der Satz konstruiert eine Welt mit Hilfe eines logischen Ge- ihren internen Eigenschaften . nen Eigenschaften , so beschreibt der Satz die Wirklichkeit nach Wie die Beschreibung einen Gegenstand nach seinen exter- Der Satz ist die Beschreibung eines Sachverhaltes . Dazu muss sie durch ihn vollständig beschrieben werden . sein . 4 . 023 Die Wirklichkeit muss durch den Satz auf ja oder nein fixiert er s a g t , d a s s es sich so verhält . Der Satz z e i g t , wie es sich verhält , w e n n er wahr ist . Und 4 . 022 Der Satz z e i g t seinen Sinn . Satz verstehe ich , ohne dass mir sein Sinn erklärt wurde . ihm dargestellte Sachlage , wenn ich den Satz verstehe . Und den 4 . 021 Der Satz ist ein Bild der Wirklichkeit : Denn ich kenne die von stehen , ohne dass er uns erklärt wurde . 4 . 02 Dies sehen wir daraus , dass wir den Sinn des Satzzeichens ver- liche der Abbildung zu verlieren . Und aus ihr wurde die Buchstabenschrift , ohne das Wesent- glyphenschrift , welche die Tatsachen die sie beschreibt abbildet . 4 . 016 Um das Wesen des Satzes zu verstehen , denken wir an die Hiero- serer Ausdrucksweise , ruht in der Logik der Abbildung . 4 . 015 Die Möglichkeit aller Gleichnisse , der ganzen Bildhaftigkeit un- che der Grammophonplatte . Sie ist die Regel der Übersetzung der Notensprache in die Spra- jektion , welches die Symphonie in die Notensprache projiziert . verschiedenen Gebilde . Und jene Regel ist das Gesetz der Pro- in besteht eben die innere Ähnlichkeit dieser scheinbar so ganz nach der ersten Regel wieder die Partitur ableiten kann , dar- LOGISCH-PHILOSOPHISCHE ABHANDLUNG 110 einem anderen Stamm , einen anderen Sinn . Stamm ergibt mit einer anderen Endung und seine Endung mit Auch der Satz „ambulo“ ist zusammengesetzt , denn sein gegliedert ist . 4 . 032 Nur insoweit ist der Satz ein Bild einer Sachlage , als er logisch treten lässt . nicht vertreten . Dass sich die L og ik der Tatsachen nicht ver- Mein Grundgedanke ist , dass die „logischen Konstanten“ tung von Gegenständen durch Zeichen . 4 . 0312 Die Möglichkeit des Satzes beruht auf dem Prinzip der Vertre- ein lebendes Bild—den Sachverhalt vor . und untereinander sind sie verbunden , so stellt das Ganze—wie 4 . 0311 Ein Name steht für ein Ding , ein anderer für ein anderes Ding diesen Sinn ; dieser Satz stellt diese und diese Sachlage dar . Man kann geradezu sagen : statt , dieser Satz hat diesen und stellt . 4 . 031 Im Satz wird gleichsam eine Sachlage probeweise zusammenge- Der Satz sagt nur insoweit etwas aus , als er ein Bild ist . ist . Und der Zusammenhang ist eben , dass er ihr logisches Bild l i ch mit der Sachlage zusammenhängen . Der Satz teilt uns eine Sachlage mit , also muss er we s e nt - 4 . 03 Ein Satz muss mit alten Ausdrücken einen neuen Sinn mitteilen . mitteilen kann . 4 . 027 Es liegt im Wesen des Satzes , dass er uns einen ne u e n Sinn Mit den Sätzen aber verständigen wir uns . uns erklärt werden , dass wir sie verstehen . 4 . 026 Die Bedeutungen der einfachen Zeichen der Wörter ) müssen handelt sie alle gleich . dern auch Zeit- , Eigenschafts- und Bindewörter etc . ; und es be- Und das Wörterbuch übersetzt nicht nur Substantiva , son- übersetzt , sondern nur die Satzbestandteile werden übersetzt . sich , dass man jeden S a t z der einen in einen S a t z der anderen 4 . 025 Die Übersetzung einer Sprache in eine andere geht nicht so vor Man versteht ihn , wenn man seine Bestandteile versteht . LOGISCH-PHILOSOPHISCHE ABHANDLUNG 111 verständigen ? Solange man nur weiss , dass sie falsch gemeint 4 . 062 Kann man sich nicht mit falschen Sätzen , wie bisher mit wahren , bezeichnet , was „∼p“ auf die falsche Art , etc . Man könnte dann z . B . sagen , dass „p“ auf die wahre Art netem sind . falsch gleichberechtigte Beziehungen von Zeichen und Bezeich- abhängigen Sinn hat , so kann man leicht glauben , dass wahr und 4 . 061 Beachtet man nicht , dass der Satz einen von den Tatsachen un- Bild der Wirklichkeit ist . 4 . 06 Nur dadurch kann der Satz wahr oder falsch sein , indem er ein 4 . 05 Die Wirklichkeit wird mit dem Satz verglichen . erklären kann . nicht , weil sie nicht die Mannigfaltigkeit dieser Beziehungen Sehens der räumlichen Beziehungen durch die „Raumbrille“ 4 . 0412 Aus demselben Grunde genügt die idealistische Erklärung des die notwendige mathematische Mannigfaltigkeit haben . Alle diese Bezeichnungsweisen genügen nicht , weil sie nicht feststellen . U . s . w . nicht genügen—wir könnten die Identität der Variablen nicht mentstellen versuchen—etwa so : „ ( A , A ) . F A , A ) “—es würde Wollten wir es durch Einführung einer Marke in die Argu- nicht den Bereich der Allgemeinheitsbezeichnung . etwa so : „f ( xa ) “—es würde auch nicht genügen—wir wüssten meinert wurde . Wollten wir es durch einen Index „a“ anzeigen— fx“ , es würde nicht genügen—wir wüssten nicht , was verallge- Vorsetzen eines Indexes vor „f x“ ausdrücken—etwa so : „Alg . 4 . 0411 Wollten wir z . B . das , was wir durch „ ( x ) f x“ ausdrücken , durch heraus . selbst wieder abbilden . Aus ihr kann man beim Abbilden nicht 4 . 041 Diese mathematische Mannigfaltigkeit kann man natürlich nicht Dynamische Modelle . Mannigfaltigkeit besitzen . Vergleiche Hertz’s Mechanik , über Die beiden müssen die gleiche logische mathematische ) Sachlage die er darstellt . 4 . 04 Am Satz muss gerade soviel zu unterscheiden sein , als an der LOGISCH-PHILOSOPHISCHE ABHANDLUNG 112 logischen Ort , den der verneinte Satz bestimmt . 4 . 0641 Man könnte sagen : Die Verneinung bezieht sich schon auf den dasselbe gilt von der Verneinung , etc . ihn ihm nicht geben , denn sie bejaht ja gerade den Sinn . Und 4 . 064 Jeder Satz muss s ch o n einen Sinn haben ; die Bejahung kann sondern das , was „wahr ist“ muss das Verbum schon enthalten . Satzes ist nicht „ist wahr“ oder „ist falsch“—wie Frege glaubte— , genschaften etwa „falsch“ oder „wahr“ hiessen ; das Verbum eines nichts , denn er bezeichnet kein Ding Wahrheitswert ) dessen Ei- weiss und schwarz ist ; einem Satz ohne Sinn aber entspricht gar nen auf einen Punkt des Papiers zeigen , auch ohne zu wissen , was Der Punkt an dem das Gleichnis hinkt ist nun der : Wir kön- Satzes . den ich „p“ wahr nenne , und damit bestimme ich den Sinn des oder falsch ) , muss ich bestimmt haben , unter welchen Umstän- wann man ihn weiss nennt ; um sagen zu können : „p“ ist wahr muss ich vorerst wissen , wann man einen Punkt schwarz und Um aber sagen zu können , ein Punkt sei schwarz oder weiss , zur Beurteilung aufgestellt wird , etc . etc . Frege’schen Wahrheitswert ) , so entspricht dies der Annahme , die negative Tatsache . Bezeichne ich einen Punkt der Fläche einen eine positive—der , dass ein Punkt weiss nicht schwarz ) ist , eine schwarz ist . Der Tatsache , dass ein Punkt schwarz ist , entspricht indem man für jeden Punkt der Fläche angibt , ob er weiss oder auf weissem Papier ; die Form des Fleckes kann man beschreiben , 4 . 063 Ein Bild zur Erklärung des Wahrheitsbegriffes : Schwarzer Fleck es entspricht ihnen eine und dieselbe Wirklichkeit . Die Sätze „p“ und „∼p“ haben entgegengesetzten Sinn , aber Merkmal seines Sinnes ∼∼p=p ) . Dass in einem Satz die Verneinung vorkommt , ist noch kein Wirklichkeit nichts entspricht . n e n , ist wichtig . Denn es zeigt , dass dem Zeichen „∼“ in der 4 . 0621 Dass aber die Zeichen „p“ und „∼p“ das gleiche sagen kö n - Auffassung wahr und nicht falsch . und es sich so verhält wie wir es meinen , so ist „p“ in der neuen wie wir es durch ihn sagen ; und wenn wir mit „p“∼pmeinen , sind . Nein ! Denn , wahr ist ein Satz , wenn es sich so verhält , LOGISCH-PHILOSOPHISCHE ABHANDLUNG 113 schaft . zu schaffen , als irgend eine andere Hypothese der Naturwissen- 4 . 1122 Die Darwinsche Theorie hat mit der Philosophie nicht mehr und eine analoge Gefahr gibt es auch bei meiner Methode . sich meistens in unwesentliche psychologische Untersuchungen sophie der Logik für so wesentlich hielten ? Nur verwickelten sie dium der Denkprozesse , welches die Philosophen für die Philo- Entspricht nicht mein Studium der Zeichensprache dem Stu- Erkenntnistheorie ist die Philosophie der Psychologie . eine andere Naturwissenschaft . 4 . 1121 Die Psychologie ist der Philosophie nicht verwandter als irgend be und verschwommen sind , klar machen und scharf abgrenzen . Die Philosophie soll die Gedanken , die sonst , gleichsam , trü- ze“ , sondern das Klarwerden von Sätzen . Das Resultat der Philosophie sind nicht „philosophische Sät- gen . Ein philosophisches Werk besteht wesentlich aus Erläuterun- Die Philosophie ist keine Lehre , sondern eine Tätigkeit . ken . 4 . 112 Der Zweck der Philosophie ist die logische Klärung der Gedan- unter , aber nicht neben den Naturwissenschaften steht . Das Wort „Philosophie“ muss etwas bedeuten , was über oder 4 . 111 Die Philosophie ist keine der Naturwissenschaften . schaft oder die Gesamtheit der Naturwissenschaften ) . 4 . 11 Die Gesamtheit der wahren Sätze ist die gesamte Naturwissen- dar . 4 . 1 Der Satz stellt das Bestehen und Nichtbestehen der Sachverhalte die Vorbereitung zu einem Satze ist . schon , dass das , was verneint wird , schon ein Satz und nicht erst Dass man den verneinten Satz wieder verneinen kann , zeigt serhalb diesem liegend beschreibt . des logischen Ortes des verneinten Satzes , indem er jenen aus- Der verneinende Satz bestimmt einen logischen Ort mit Hilfe Ort als der verneinte . Der verneinende Satz bestimmt einen a n d e r e n logischen LOGISCH-PHILOSOPHISCHE ABHANDLUNG 114 Gegenstände und Sachverhalte bezw . von Eigenschaften der 4 . 122 Wir können in gewissem Sinne von formalen Eigenschaften der unserer Zeichensprache stimmt . richtigen logischen Auffassung seien , wenn nur einmal alles in 4 . 1213 Jetzt verstehen wir auch unser Gefühl : dass wir im Besitze einer 4 . 1212 Was gezeigt werden ka n n , ka n n nicht gesagt werden . Struktur ; ebenso , wenn einer aus dem anderen folgt . U . s . w . Wenn zwei Sätze einander widersprechen , so zeigt dies ihre demselben Gegenstand die Rede ist . vorkommt , zwei Sätze „fa“ und „ga“ , dass in ihnen beiden von 4 . 1211 So zeigt ein Satz „fa“ , dass in seinem Sinn der Gegenstand a Er weist sie auf . Der Satz z e i g t die logische Form der Wirklichkeit . sie ausdrücken . Was s i c h in der Sprache ausdrückt , können w i r nicht durch Was sich in der Sprache spiegelt , kann sie nicht darstellen . sich in ihm . 4 . 121 Der Satz kann die logische Form nicht darstellen , sie spiegelt ausserhalb der Welt . mit dem Satze ausserhalb der Logik aufstellen können , das heisst Um die logische Form darstellen zu können , müssten wir uns muss , um sie darstellen zu können—die logische Form . nicht das darstellen , was er mit der Wirklichkeit gemein haben 4 . 12 Der Satz kann die gesamte Wirklichkeit darstellen , aber er kann chen . werden . Alles was sich aussprechen lässt , lässt sich klar ausspre- 4 . 116 Alles was überhaupt gedacht werden kann , kann klar gedacht darstellt . 4 . 115 Sie wird das Unsagbare bedeuten , indem sie das Sagbare klar grenzen . Sie soll das Undenkbare von innen durch das Denkbare be- 4 . 114 Sie soll das Denkbare abgrenzen und damit das Undenkbare . senschaft . 4 . 113 Die Philosophie begrenzt das bestreitbare Gebiet der Naturwis- LOGISCH-PHILOSOPHISCHE ABHANDLUNG 115 den sie darstellenden Sätzen aus . lagen drückt sich sprachlich durch eine interne Relation zwischen 4 . 125 Das Bestehen einer internen Relation zwischen möglichen Sach- Eigenschaften von beiden Formen auszusagen . schaft ; denn dies setzt voraus , dass es einen Sinn habe , beide dass man sagt , die eine habe diese , die andere aber jene Eigen- 4 . 1241 Formen kann man nicht dadurch von einander unterscheiden , zuzusprechen , als sie ihm abzusprechen . Es wäre ebenso unsinnig , dem Satze eine formale Eigenschaft dieses Satzes aus . sich in dem sie darstellenden Satz , durch eine interne Eigenschaft lage wird nicht durch einen Satz ausgedrückt , sondern es drückt 4 . 124 Das Bestehen einer internen Eigenschaft einer möglichen Sach- tes „Gegenstand“ . genschaft“ und „Relation“ der schwankende Gebrauch des Wor- Hier entspricht dem schwankenden Gebrauch der Worte „Ei- beiden Gegenstände nicht in dieser Relation stünden . von heller und dunkler eo ipso . Es ist undenkbar , dass d i e s e Diese blaue Farbe und jene stehen in der internen Relation genstand sie nicht besitzt . 4 . 123 Eine Eigenschaft ist intern , wenn es undenkbar ist , dass ihr Ge- von Gesichtszügen sprechen . Zug dieser Tatsache nennen . In dem Sinn , in welchem wir etwa 4 . 1221 Eine interne Eigenschaft einer Tatsache können wir auch einen jenen Gegenständen handeln . sich in den Sätzen , welche jene Sachverhalte darstellen und von kann aber nicht durch Sätze behauptet werden , sondern es zeigt Das Bestehen solcher interner Eigenschaften und Relationen zeigen . nen Relationen und den eigentlichen externen ) Relationen zu Philosophen sehr verbreiteten Verwechslung zwischen den inter- Ich führe diese Ausdrücke ein , um den Grund der , bei den schaft“ ; statt Relation der Strukturen „interne Relation“ . Statt Eigenschaft der Struktur sage ich auch „interne Eigen- malen Relationen und Relationen von Strukturen . Struktur der Tatsachen reden und in demselben Sinne von for- LOGISCH-PHILOSOPHISCHE ABHANDLUNG 116 Denn jede Variable stellt eine konstante Form dar , welche 4 . 1271 Jede Variable ist das Zeichen eines formalen Begriffes . die Gegenstände , welche unter diesen Begriff fallen . 4 . 127 Die Satzvariable bezeichnet den formalen Begriff und ihre Werte in welcher nur dieser charakteristische Zug konstant ist . Der Ausdruck des formalen Begriffes also , eine Satzvariable , unter den Begriff fallen . so ein charakteristischer Zug aller Symbole , deren Bedeutungen Das Zeichen der Merkmale eines formalen Begriffes ist al- Symbole . Der Ausdruck der formalen Eigenschaft ist ein Zug gewisser nicht durch Funktionen ausgedrückt . Denn ihre Merkmale , die formalen Eigenschaften , werden Begriffe , durch eine Funktion dargestellt werden . Die formalen Begriffe können ja nicht , wie die eigentlichen lenzeichen , dass es eine Zahl bezeichnet etc . Der Name zeigt , dass er einen Gegenstand bezeichnet , das Zah- Sondern es zeigt sich an dem Zeichen dieses Gegenstandes selbst . stand fällt , kann nicht durch einen Satz ausgedrückt werden . Dass etwas unter einen formalen Begriff als dessen Gegen- die ganze alte Logik durchzieht , klar zu machen . lung der formalen Begriffe mit den eigentlichen Begriffen , welche Ich führe diesen Ausdruck ein , um den Grund der Verwechs- chen , können wir nun auch von formalen Begriffen reden . 4 . 126 In dem Sinne , in welchem wir von formalen Eigenschaften spre- Nachfolger von a . Steht bin einer dieser Beziehungen zu a , so nenne ich beinen „ ( ∃x , y ) aRx xRy yRb“ , u . s . f . Ebenso die Reihe der Sätze „aRb“ , „ ( ∃x ) aRx xRb“ , einer internen Relation geordnet . Die Zahlenreihe ist nicht nach einer externen , sondern nach ich Formenreihen . 4 . 1252 Reihen , welche durch i nt e r n e Relationen geordnet sind , nenne oder extern“ seien . 4 . 1251 Hier erledigt sich nun die Streitfrage „ob alle Relationen intern LOGISCH-PHILOSOPHISCHE ABHANDLUNG 117 Formenreihe kann man nur durch eine Variable ausdrücken , denn aRx . xRb , ∃x , y ) aRx . xRy . yRb , Das allgemeine Glied einer Ausdruck für das allgemeine Glied der Formenreihe : aRb , ∃x ) in der Begriffsschrift ausdrücken , so brauchen wir hierzu einen 4 . 1273 Wollen wir den allgemeinen Satz : „bist ein Nachfolger von a“ einführen ; oder den Begriff der Zahl und bestimmte Zahlen . und auch spezielle Funktionen wie Russell ) als Grundbegriffe einführen . Man kann also z . B . nicht den Begriff der Funktion , len Begriffes u n d den formalen Begriff selbst als Grundbegriffe bereits gegeben . Man kann also nicht Gegenstände eines forma- 4 . 12721 Der formale Begriff ist mit einem Gegenstand , der unter ihn fällt , unsinnig wäre , zu sagen : 2+2ist um 3 Uhr gleich 4 . Es ist ebenso unsinnig zu sagen „es gibt nur eine 1“ , als es alle ähnlichen sind unsinnig . Ausdrücke wie „1 ist eine Zahl“ , „es gibt nur Eine Null“ und dargestellt . Wie Frege und Russell glaubten . griffsschrift durch Variable , nicht durch Funktionen oder Klassen Sie alle bezeichnen formale Begriffe und werden in der Be- tion“ , „Zahl“ , etc . Dasselbe gilt von den Worten „Komplex“ , „Tatsache“ , „Funk- d e zu sprechen . Und es ist unsinnig , von der A n z a h l a l l e r G e g e n s t ä n - Gegenstände“ , oder „Es gibt ℵ0Gegenstände“ . man etwa sagt „Es gibt Bücher“ . Und ebenso wenig „Es gibt 100 So kann man z . B . nicht sagen „Es gibt Gegenstände“ , wie braucht wird , entstehen unsinnige Scheinsätze . Wo immer es anders , also als eigentliches Begriffswort ge- “ durch „ ( ∃x , y ) . “ . Zum Beispiel in dem Satz „es gibt 2 Gegenstände , welche variablen Namen ausgedrückt . richtig gebraucht wird , wird es in der Begriffsschrift durch den Wo immer das Wort „Gegenstand“ „Ding“ , „Sache“ , etc . begriffes G e g e n s t a n d . 4 . 1272 So ist der variable Name „x“ das eigentliche Zeichen des Schein- Werte aufgefasst werden kann . alle ihre Werte besitzen , und die als formale Eigenschaft dieser LOGISCH-PHILOSOPHISCHE ABHANDLUNG 118 tarsatzes vor . 4 . 23 Der Name kommt im Satz nur im Zusammenhange des Elemen- auch dann müsste es Gegenstände und Sachverhalte geben . halt aus unendlich vielen Gegenständen zusammengesetzt ist , aus unendlich vielen Sachverhalten besteht und jeder Sachver- 4 . 2211 Auch wenn die Welt unendlich komplex ist , so dass jede Tatsache Es frägt sich hier , wie kommt der Satzverband zustande . bindung bestehen . tarsätze kommen müssen , die aus Namen in unmittelbarer Ver- 4 . 221 Es ist offenbar , dass wir bei der Analyse der Sätze auf Elemen- hang , eine Verkettung , von Namen . 4 . 22 Der Elementarsatz besteht aus Namen . Er ist ein Zusammen- mit ihm in Widerspruch stehen kann . 4 . 211 Ein Zeichen des Elementarsatzes ist es , dass kein Elementarsatz eines Sachverhaltes . 4 . 21 Der einfachste Satz , der Elementarsatz , behauptet das Bestehen bestehens der Sachverhalte . einstimmung mit den Möglichkeiten des Bestehens und Nicht- 4 . 2 Der Sinn des Satzes ist seine Übereinstimmung , und Nichtüber- etc . darum gibt es keinen philosophischen Monismus oder Dualismus , Darum gibt es in der Logik keine ausgezeichneten Zahlen und 4 . 128 Die logischen Formen sind zahl l o s . Subjekt-Prädikatsätze ? “ ) Man kann also z . B . nicht fragen : „Gibt es unanalysierbare Denn kein Satz kann eine solche Frage beantworten . 4 . 1274 Die Frage nach der Existenz eines formalen Begriffes ist unsinnig . gehenden Satz erzeugt . Form der Operation , welche das folgende Glied aus dem vorher- men , indem wir ihr erstes Glied angeben und die allgemeine Wir können das allgemeine Glied der Formenreihe bestim- falsch ; sie enthält einen circulus vitiosus . sie allgemeine Sätze , wie den obigen ausdrücken wollen ist daher Dies haben Frege und Russell übersehen ; die Art und Weise wie der Begriff : Glied dieser Formenreihe , ist ein f o r m a l e r Begriff . LOGISCH-PHILOSOPHISCHE ABHANDLUNG 119 ν=0 νMöglichkeiten . ten gibt es Kn= P n n 4 . 27 Bezüglich des Bestehens und Nichtbestehens von nSachverhal- wahr und welche falsch sind . gaben aller Elementarsätze plus der Angabe , welche von ihnen vollständig . Die Welt ist vollständig beschrieben durch die An- 4 . 26 Die Angabe aller wahren Elementarsätze beschreibt die Welt Elementarsatz falsch , so besteht der Sachverhalt nicht . 4 . 25 Ist der Elementarsatz wahr , so besteht der Sachverhalt ; ist der sich später zeigen . weder Elementarsätze , noch sonst sinnvolle Zeichen . Dies wird Ausdrücke wie „a=a“ , oder von diesen abgeleitete , sind möglich , dass ich sie nicht ineinander übersetzen kann . ich nicht weiss , dass die beiden gleichbedeutend sind ; es ist un- gleichbedeutenden deutschen Wortes , so ist es unmöglich , dass Kenne ich etwa die Bedeutung eines englischen und eines zu wissen , ob sie Dasselbe oder Verschiedenes bedeuten ? wir einen Satz , worin zwei Namen vorkommen , verstehen , ohne selbe Ding oder zwei verschiedene Dinge bezeichnen ? —Können 4 . 243 Können wir zwei Namen verstehen , ohne zu wissen , ob sie das- „b“ aus . stellung ; sie sagen nichts über die Bedeutung der Zeichen „a“ , 4 . 242 Ausdrücke von der Form „a=b“ sind also nur Behelfe der Dar- in der Form „a=bDef . “ . Die Definition ist eine Zeichenregel . setzen , so schreibe ich die Gleichung—Definition— ( wie Russell ) indem ich bestimme , es solle ein bereits bekanntes Zeichen „a“ er- Führe ich durch eine Gleichung ein neues Zeichen „b“ ein , ersetzbar . „a=b“ heisst also : das Zeichen „a“ ist durch das Zeichen „b“ setze . drücke ich dies aus , indem ich zwischen beide das Zeichen „=“ 4 . 241 Gebrauche ich zwei Zeichen in ein und derselben Bedeutung , so Oder ich deute ihn durch die Buchstaben p , q , ran . der Form : „fx“ , „φ ( x , y ) “ , etc . Den Elementarsatz schreibe ich als Funktion der Namen in zelne Buchstaben „x“ , „y“ , „z“ ) an . 4 . 24 Die Namen sind die einfachen Symbole , ich deute sie durch ein- LOGISCH-PHILOSOPHISCHE ABHANDLUNG 120 κ=0 κ=LnMöglichkeiten . zen gibt es Kn P Kn nes Satzes mit den Wahrheitsmöglichkeiten von nElementarsät- 4 . 42 Bezüglich der Übereinstimmung und Nichtübereinstimmung ei- hängt f ü h l b a r von dem der Elementarsätze ab . grundlegend ist . Ja , das Verständnis der allgemeinen Sätze Elementarsätze für das Verständnis aller anderen Satzarten 4 . 411 Es ist von vornherein wahrscheinlich , dass die Einführung der gungen der Wahrheit und Falschheit der Sätze . 4 . 41 Die Wahrheitsmöglichkeiten der Elementarsätze sind die Bedin- ze . einstimmung mit den Wahrheitsmöglichkeiten der Elementarsät- 4 . 4 Der Satz ist der Ausdruck der Übereinstimmung und Nichtüber- F F F W F F F W F F F W W W F F F W F W W F F W W F W F WWW W W W p q r p q p ten ) : ten in leichtverständlicher Symbolik deren Wahrheitsmöglichkei- hen der „W“ und „F“ unter der Reihe der Elementarsätze bedeu- der Art darstellen „W“ bedeutet „wahr“ , „F“ , „falsch“ . Die Rei- 4 . 31 Die Wahrheitsmöglichkeiten können wir durch Schemata folgen- halte . Möglichkeiten des Bestehens und Nichtbestehens der Sachver- 4 . 3 Die Wahrheitsmöglichkeiten der Elementarsätze bedeuten die der Wahrheit—und Falschheit—von nElementarsätzen . 4 . 28 Diesen Kombinationen entsprechen ebenso viele Möglichkeiten die andern nicht bestehen . Es können alle Kombinationen der Sachverhalte bestehen , LOGISCH-PHILOSOPHISCHE ABHANDLUNG 121 Ist die Reihenfolge der Wahrheitsmöglichkeiten im Schema Satz kann unmöglich von sich selbst aussagen , dass er wahr ist . wenig zum Satzgefüge , wie etwa die Nummer des Satzes . Ein so bezeichneten Sätze für wahr halten . „ ` “ gehört daher ebenso er zeigt bei Frege und Russell ) nur an , dass diese Autoren die Frege’s „Urteilsstrich“ „ ` “ ist logisch ganz bedeutungslos ; ein Satzzeichen . F F W „ W F F W W W W W “ p q 4 . 442 Es ist z . B . drücken wie die Schemata der „W“ und „F“ . Analoges gilt natürlich für alle Zeichen , die dasselbe aus- Klammern . —„Logische Gegenstände“ gibt es nicht . wenig , wie den horizontalen und vertikalen Strichen oder den Gegenstand oder Komplex von Gegenständen ) entspricht ; so 4 . 441 Es ist klar , dass dem Komplex der Zeichen „F“ und „W“ kein und der Wahrheitsmöglichkeiten entsteht , ist ein Satzzeichen . 4 . 44 Das Zeichen , welches durch die Zuordnung jener Abzeichen „W“ neswegs bestimmt . etc . dann wäre nach Frege’s Bestimmung der Sinn von „∼p“ kei- „das Falsche“ wirklich Gegenstände und die Argumente in ∼p Wahrheitsbegriffes bei Frege falsch : Wären „das Wahre“ und seiner Begriffsschrift vorausgeschickt . Nur ist die Erklärung des Frege hat sie daher ganz richtig als Erklärung der Zeichen Der Satz ist der Ausdruck seiner Wahrheitsbedingungen . Wahrheitsbedingungen des Satzes aus . mit den Wahrheitsmöglichkeiten der Elementarsätze drückt die 4 . 431 Der Ausdruck der Übereinstimmung und Nichtübereinstimmung mung . Das Fehlen dieses Abzeichens bedeutet die Nichtübereinstim- Abzeichen „W“ wahr ) zuordnen . wir dadurch ausdrücken , indem wir ihnen im Schema etwa das 4 . 43 Die Übereinstimmung mit den Wahrheitsmöglichkeiten können LOGISCH-PHILOSOPHISCHE ABHANDLUNG 122 bolismus der Arithmetik . ren zum Symbolismus , und zwar ähnlich wie die „0“ zum Sym- 4 . 4611 Tautologie und Kontradiktion sind aber nicht unsinnig ; sie gehö- es regnet oder nicht regnet . Ich weiss z . B . nichts über das Wetter , wenn ich weiss , dass Richtung auseinandergehen . Wie der Punkt von dem zwei Pfeile in entgegengesetzter Tautologie und Kontradiktion sind sinnlos . Bedingung wahr . ist bedingungslos wahr ; und die Kontradiktion ist unter keiner Die Tautologie hat keine Wahrheitsbedingungen , denn sie dass sie nichts sagen . 4 . 461 Der Satz zeigt was er sagt , die Tautologie und die Kontradiktion , ten Fall eine Kontradiktion . Im ersten Fall nennen wir den Satz eine Tautologie , im zwei- r i s ch . keiten falsch : Die Wahrheitsbedingungen sind ko n t r a d i k t o - Im zweiten Fall ist der Satz für sämtliche Wahrheitsmöglich- bedingungen sind t a u t o l o g i s c h . lichkeiten der Elementarsätze wahr . Wir sagen , die Wahrheits- In dem einen Fall ist der Satz für sämtliche Wahrheitsmög- es zwei extreme Fälle . 4 . 46 Unter den möglichen Gruppen von Wahrheitsbedingungen gibt hören , lassen sich in eine Reihe ordnen . Wahrheitsmöglichkeiten einer Anzahl von Elementarsätzen ge- Die Gruppen von Wahrheitsbedingungen , welche zu den heitsbedingungen . 4 . 45 Für nElementarsätze gibt es Lnmögliche Gruppen von Wahr- Anzahl der Glieder in der rechten bestimmt . Die Anzahl der Stellen in der linken Klammer ist durch die „ ( WW–W ) ( p , q ) “ oder deutlicher „ ( WWFW ) ( p , q ) “ . das Satzzeichen zu : bedingungen . Schreiben wir diese Kolonne als Reihe hin , so wird ist die letzte Kolonne allein schon ein Ausdruck der Wahrheits- durch eine Kombinationsregel ein für allemal festgesetzt , dann LOGISCH-PHILOSOPHISCHE ABHANDLUNG 123 dung der Gegenstände . Und keiner logischen Verbindung entspricht k e i n e Verbin- chen . ihnen nur bestimmte Verbindungen von Gegenständen entspre- überhaupt keine Zeichenverbindungen sein , denn sonst könnten Das heisst , Sätze die für jede Sachlage wahr sind , können chen . b e l i e b i g e Verbindung entspricht nur den unverbundenen Zei- eine bestimmte logische Verbindung ihrer Bedeutungen ; j e d e 4 . 466 Einer bestimmten logischen Verbindung von Zeichen entspricht dern , ohne seinen Sinn zu ändern . Satz . Denn man kann das Wesentliche des Symbols nicht än- selbe , wie der Satz . Also ist jenes Produkt identisch mit dem 4 . 465 Das logische Produkt einer Tautologie und eines Satzes sagt das- chen . jener Gradation , die wir in der Wahrscheinlichkeitslehre brau- Gewiss , möglich , unmöglich : Hier haben wir das Anzeichen Kontradiktion unmöglich . 4 . 464 Die Wahrheit der Tautologie ist gewiss , des Satzes möglich , der von beiden kann daher die Wirklichkeit irgendwie bestimmen . logischen Raum und lässt der Wirklichkeit keinen Punkt . Keine lichen—logischen Raum ; die Kontradiktion erfüllt den ganzen Die Tautologie lässt der Wirklichkeit den ganzen—unend- grenzte Raum , worin ein Körper Platz hat . beschränkt ; im positiven Sinne , wie der von fester Substanz be- wie ein fester Körper , der die Bewegungsfreiheit der anderen Der Satz , das Bild , das Modell , sind im negativen Sinne Tatsachen durch den Satz gelassen wird . 4 . 463 Die Wahrheitsbedingungen bestimmen den Spielraum , der den keit steht . auf , so dass sie in keiner darstellenden Beziehung zur Wirklich- mung mit der Welt—die darstellenden Beziehungen—einander In der Tautologie heben die Bedingungen der Übereinstim- mögliche Sachlage zu , diese ke i n e . Sie stellen keine mögliche Sachlage dar . Denn jene lässt j e d e 4 . 462 Tautologie und Kontradiktion sind nicht Bilder der Wirklichkeit . LOGISCH-PHILOSOPHISCHE ABHANDLUNG 124 chens . gument wie am Index die Bedeutung des sie enthaltenden Zei- von Namen zu verwechseln . Ich erkenne nämlich sowohl am Ar- 5 . 02 Es liegt nahe , die Argumente von Funktionen mit den Indices 5 . 01 Die Elementarsätze sind die Wahrheitsargumente des Satzes . Der Elementarsatz ist eine Wahrheitsfunktion seiner selbst . 5 Der Satz ist eine Wahrheitsfunktion der Elementarsätze . 4 . 53 Die allgemeine Satzform ist eine Variable . Sätze Verallgemeinerungen der Elementarsätze sind . a l l e r ist ) . So könnte man in gewissem Sinne sagen , dass a l l e sätze folgt natürlich auch daraus , dass es die G e s a m t h e i t 4 . 52 Die Sätze sind Alles , was aus der Gesamtheit aller Elementar- Und das sind a ll e Sätze und s o sind sie begrenzt . lässt sich einfach fragen : welche Sätze kann ich aus ihnen bilden . 4 . 51 Angenommen , mir wären a l l e Elementarsätze gegeben : Dann Form des Satzes ist : Es verhält sich so und so . hätte voraussehen d . h . konstruieren ) können . Die allgemeine sen , dass es keinen Satz geben darf , dessen Form man nicht Dass es eine allgemeine Satzform gibt , wird dadurch bewie- sie nämlich nicht die allgemeinste . form nu r ihr Wesentliches beschrieben werden darf , —sonst wäre Es ist klar , dass bei der Beschreibung der allgemeinsten Satz- entsprechend gewählt werden . einen Sinn ausdrücken kann , wenn die Bedeutungen der Namen den kann , und dass jedes Symbol , worauf die Beschreibung passt , Symbol , auf welches die Beschreibung passt , ausgedrückt wer- Zeichensprache zu geben , so dass jeder mögliche Sinn durch ein geben : das heisst , eine Beschreibung der Sätze i r g e n d e i n e r 4 . 5 Nun scheint es möglich zu sein , die allgemeinste Satzform anzu- dem S y m b o l unwesentlich . hungen zu einander , aber diese Beziehungen sind bedeutungslos , chen noch mit einander verbunden , d . h . sie stehen in Bezie- 4 . 4661 Freilich sind auch in der Tautologie und Kontradiktion die Zei- chenverbindung , nämlich ihre Auflösung . Tautologie und Kontradiktion sind die Grenzfälle der Zei- LOGISCH-PHILOSOPHISCHE ABHANDLUNG 125 sam sind , sämtlich auch Wahrheitsgründe eines bestimmten Sat- 5 . 11 Sind die Wahrheitsgründe , die einer Anzahl von Sätzen gemein- h e i t s g r ü n d e nennen . mente , welche den Satz bewahrheiten , will ich seine Wa h r - Diejenigen Wahrheitsmöglichkeiten seiner Wahrheitsargu- F F F F ( p , q ) Kontradiktion pund nicht p ; und qund nicht q . p ∼p q ∼q ) W F F F ( p , q ) „ „ qund p . q p ) F W F F ( p , q ) „ „ qund nicht p . q ∼p ) F F W F ( p , q ) „ „ pund nicht q . p ∼q ) F F F W ) ( p , q ) „ „ Weder pnoch q . ∼p ∼q ) oder p|q ) W W F F ( p , q ) „ „ q W F W F ( p , q ) „ „ p W F F W ) ( p , q ) „ „ Wenn p , so q ; und wenn q , so p . p≡q ) F W W F ( p , q ) „ „ p , oder q , aber nicht beide . p ∼q : ∨ : q ∼p ) F W F W ) ( p , q ) „ „ Nicht p . ∼p ) F F W W ) ( p , q ) „ „ Nicht q . ∼q ) W W W F ( p , q ) „ „ poder q . p∨q ) W W F W ) ( p , q ) „ „ Wenn p , so q . p⊃q ) W F W W ) ( p , q ) „ „ Wenn q , so p . q⊃p ) F W W W ) ( p , q ) in Worten : Nicht beides pund q . ∼ ( p . q ) W W W W ) ( p , q ) Tautologie Wenn p , so p ; und wenn q , so q . p⊃p . q ⊃q ) sen sich in einem Schema folgender Art hinschreiben : 5 . 101 Die Wahrheitsfunktionen jeder Anzahl von Elementarsätzen las- Das ist die Grundlage der Wahrscheinlichkeitslehre . 5 . 1 Die Wahrheitsfunktionen lassen sich in Reihen ordnen . Namen , und deren Argumente die Indices dieser Namen . und Funktionen zugrunde . Für Frege waren die Sätze der Logik mich nicht irre , der Theorie Frege’s von der Bedeutung der Sätze Die Verwechslung von Argument und Index liegt , wenn ich hängen . Z . B . D e r Cäsar aus dem Geschlechte der Julier . einer Beschreibung des Gegenstandes , dessen Namen wir ihn an- Julius Cäsar ist „Julius“ ein Index . Der Index ist immer ein Teil vorher der Sinn von „p“ verstanden worden wäre . Im Namen der Sinn von „∼p“ ka n n n i cht verstanden werden , ohne dass wählen ; in „∼p“ aber ist „p“ kein Index , sondern ein Argument : kunft und man könnte statt „+c“ auch ein einfaches Zeichen ist . Aber diese Bezeichnung beruht auf willkürlicher Überein- dass das ganze Zeichen das Additionszeichen für Kardinalzahlen In Russell’s „+c“ ist z . B . „c“ ein Index , der darauf hinweist , LOGISCH-PHILOSOPHISCHE ABHANDLUNG 126 die Allgemeinheit auch im Symbol „ ( x ) . fx“ vorhanden ist . Dass man aus x ) . fx auf fa schliessen kann , das zeigt , dass Zusammenhang offenbar . und statt „∼p“ „p|p“ p|q= weder p , noch q ) , so wird der innere „∼p“ verhüllt . Schreiben wir aber z . B . statt „p∨q“ „p|q | . p |q“ Bezeichnungsweise die Beziehung der Satzformen von „p∨q“ und 5 . 1311 Wenn wir von p∨qund ∼pauf qschliessen , so ist hier durch die und bestehen , sobald , und dadurch dass , jene Sätze bestehen . miteinander verbinden , sondern diese Beziehungen sind intern erst in jene Beziehungen zu setzen , indem wir sie in einem Satze jener Sätze zu einander stehen ; und zwar brauchen wir sie nicht drückt sich dies durch Beziehungen aus , in welchen die Formen 5 . 131 Folgt die Wahrheit eines Satzes aus der Wahrheit anderer , so folgt , ersehen wir aus der Struktur der Sätze . 5 . 13 Dass die Wahrheit eines Satzes aus der Wahrheit anderer Sätze Jeder Satz der einem anderen widerspricht , verneint ihn . sinnvollen Satz gibt , der sie beide bejaht . Zwei Sätze sind einander entgegengesetzt , wenn es keinen der Sätze , welche „q“ bejahen . 5 . 1241 „p . q“ ist einer der Sätze , welche „p“ bejahen und zugleich einer 5 . 124 Der Satz bejaht jeden Satz der aus ihm folgt . zu schaffen . worin der Satz „p“ wahr ist , ohne seine sämtlichen Gegenstände Folgesätze stimmen . Und ähnlich könnte er keine Welt schaffen , sind , so schafft er damit auch schon eine Welt , in welcher alle ihre 5 . 123 Wenn ein Gott eine Welt erschafft , worin gewisse Sätze wahr 5 . 122 Folgt paus q , so ist der Sinn von „p“ im Sinne von „q“ enthalten . halten ; pfolgt aus q . 5 . 121 Die Wahrheitsgründe des einen sind in denen des anderen ent- Wahrheitsgründe des ersten sind . heit eines anderen „q“ , wenn alle Wahrheitsgründe des zweiten 5 . 12 Insbesondere folgt die Wahrheit eines Satzes „p“ aus der Wahr- heit jener Sätze . zes , so sagen wir , die Wahrheit dieses Satzes folge aus der Wahr- LOGISCH-PHILOSOPHISCHE ABHANDLUNG 127 same aller Sätze , welche nichts miteinander gemein haben . mit einem anderen gemein hat . Die Tautologie ist das Gemein- 5 . 143 Die Kontradiktion ist das Gemeinsame der Sätze , was ke i n Satz 5 . 142 Die Tautologie folgt aus allen Sätzen : sie sagt Nichts . 5 . 141 Folgt paus qund qaus p , so sind sie ein und derselbe Satz . jener weniger als dieser . 5 . 14 Folgt ein Satz aus einem anderen , so sagt dieser mehr als jener , unseren Glauben an seine Wahrheit . er wahr ist , so ist das Einleuchten auch keine Rechtfertigung für 5 . 1363 Wenn daraus , dass ein Satz uns einleuchtet , nicht f o l g t , dass logie ist . „A weiss , dass pder Fall ist“ ist sinnlos , wenn peine Tauto- sen und Gewusstem , ist der der logischen Notwendigkeit . wie die des logischen Schlusses . —Der Zusammenhang von Wis- wissen , wenn die Kausalität eine i n n e r e Notwendigkeit wäre , jetzt nicht gewusst werden können . Nur dann könnten wir sie 5 . 1362 Die Willensfreiheit besteht darin , dass zukünftige Handlungen Der Glaube an den Kausalnexus ist der A b e r g l a u b e . wärtigen erschliessen . 5 . 1361 Die Ereignisse der Zukunft kö n n e n wir nicht aus den gegen- es nicht . 5 . 136 Einen Kausalnexus , der einen solchen Schluss rechtfertigte , gibt geschlossen werden . auf das Bestehen einer , von ihr gänzlich verschiedenen Sachlage 5 . 135 Auf keine Weise kann aus dem Bestehen irgend einer Sachlage 5 . 134 Aus einem Elementarsatz lässt sich kein anderer folgern . 5 . 133 Alles Folgern geschieht a priori . sig . Schlüsse rechtfertigen sollen , sind sinnlos , und wären überflüs- „Schlussgesetze“ , welche—wie bei Frege und Russell—die Nur sie selbst können den Schluss rechtfertigen . entnehmen . Die Art des Schlusses ist allein aus den beiden Sätzen zu 5 . 132 Folgt paus q , so kann ich von qauf pschliessen ; paus qfolgern . LOGISCH-PHILOSOPHISCHE ABHANDLUNG 128 Naturgesetze mitinbegriffen ) geben dem Eintreffen des einen Er- Alle mir bekannten Umstände die hypothetisch angenommenen ne weisse Kugel wie eine schwarze ziehen werde , so heisst das : Wenn ich nun sage : Es ist gleich wahrscheinlich , dass ich ei- D a s ist also kein mathematisches Faktum . weissen Kugeln bei fortgesetztem Ziehen einander nähern . feststellen , dass sich die Zahlen der gezogenen schwarzen und sie wieder in die Urne zurück . Dann kann ich durch den Versuch keine anderen ) . Ich ziehe eine Kugel nach der anderen und lege 5 . 154 In einer Urne seien gleichviel weisse und schwarze Kugeln und es nicht . Ein Ereignis trifft ein , oder es trifft nicht ein , ein Mittelding gibt 5 . 153 Ein Satz ist an sich weder wahrscheinlich noch unwahrscheinlich . Anwendung auf Tautologie und Kontradiktion . Grenzfall der Wahrscheinlichkeit . scheinlichkeit 1 . Die Gewissheit des logischen Schlusses ist ein Folgt paus q , so gibt der Satz „q“ dem Satz „p“ die Wahr- 2 . tarsätze ) geben einander die Wahrscheinlichkeit 1 Von einander unabhängige Sätze z . B . irgend zwei Elemen- haben , nennen wir von einander unabhängig . 5 . 152 Sätze , welche keine Wahrheitsargumente mit einander gemein keitssätzen eigen wäre . 5 . 1511 Es gibt keinen besonderen Gegenstand , der den Wahrscheinlich- rgibt dann dem Satze sdie Wahrscheinlichkeit : Wrs Wr . die in gleichen Kolonnen mit „W“ des Satzes rstehen . Der Satz der „W“ im Satze r ; Wrs die Anzahl derjenigen „W“ im Satze s , 5 . 151 Sei in einem Schema wie dem obigen in No . 5 . 101 Wrdie Anzahl Satz „r“ dem Satz „s“ gibt . Wrs Wrdas Mass der Wa h r s ch e i n l i ch k e i t , welche der Wahrheitsgründe von „r“ sind , dann nennen wir das Verhältnis : Anzahl derjenigen Wahrheitsgründe des Satzes „s“ , die zugleich 5 . 15 Ist Wrdie Anzahl der Wahrheitsgründe des Satzes „r“ , Wrs die tologie ihr substanzloser Mittelpunkt . Die Kontradiktion ist die äussere Grenze der Sätze , die Tau- Tautologie innerhalb aller Sätze . Die Kontradiktion verschwindet sozusagen ausserhalb , die LOGISCH-PHILOSOPHISCHE ABHANDLUNG 129 bedeutungsvolle Weise aus einem anderen entsteht . Also dort , 5 . 233 Die Operation kann erst dort auftreten , wo ein Satz auf logisch der Operation , durch welche ein Glied aus dem anderen entsteht . 5 . 232 Die interne Relation , die eine Reihe ordnet , ist äquivalent mit der internen Ähnlichkeit ihrer Formen abhängen . 5 . 231 Und das wird natürlich von ihren formalen Eigenschaften , von um aus ihm den anderen zu machen . 5 . 23 Die Operation ist das , was mit dem einen Satz geschehen muss , Strukturen ihres Resultats und ihrer Basen . 5 . 22 Die Operation ist der Ausdruck einer Beziehung zwischen den Operation ) hervorbringt . Operation darstellen , die ihn aus anderen Sätzen den Basen der drucksweise hervorheben , dass wir einen Satz als Resultat einer 5 . 21 Wir können diese internen Beziehungen dadurch in unserer Aus- ander . 5 . 2 Die Strukturen der Sätze stehen in internen Beziehungen zu ein- deren Sätzen . Der Wahrscheinlichkeitssatz ist gleichsam ein Auszug aus an- Sachlage sein , aber er ist immer e i n vollständiges Bild . Ein Satz kann zwar ein unvollständiges Bild einer gewissen kennen , wohl aber e twa s über ihre Form wissen . scheinlichkeit . —Wenn wir zwar eine Tatsache nicht vollkommen Nur in Ermanglung der Gewissheit gebrauchen wir die Wahr- Sie involviert eine allgemeine Beschreibung einer Satzform . 5 . 156 So ist die Wahrscheinlichkeit eine Verallgemeinerung . keit . bestimmten Ereignisses den und den Grad der Wahrscheinlich- die ich sonst nicht weiter kenne—geben dem Eintreffen eines 5 . 155 Die Einheit des Wahrscheinlichkeitssatzes ist : Die Umstände— kenne , unabhängig ist . der beiden Ereignisse von den Umständen , die ich nicht näher Was ich durch den Versuch bestätige ist , dass das Eintreffen 2 . leicht zu entnehmen ist—jedem die Wahrscheinlichkeit 1 anderen . Das heisst , sie geben—wie aus den obigen Erklärungen eignisses nicht m e h r Wahrscheinlichkeit als dem Eintreffen des LOGISCH-PHILOSOPHISCHE ABHANDLUNG 130 sultat nenne ich ihre successive Anwendung „O0O0O0a“ ist das 5 . 2521 Die fortgesetzte Anwendung einer Operation auf ihr eigenes Re- ihr Gebrauch gemacht . dieses Fortschreitens nicht zugegeben , aber immer wieder von heads ) möglich . Russell und Whitehead haben die Möglichkeit reihe von Type zu Type in den Hierarchien Russells und White- 5 . 252 Nur so ist das Fortschreiten von Glied zu Glied in einer Formen- kann das Resultat einer Operation ihre eigene Basis werden . 5 . 251 Eine Funktion kann nicht ihr eigenes Argument sein , wohl aber selt werden . Operation und Funktion dürfen nicht miteinander verwech- hängt von den Basen der Operation ab . Die Operation sagt ja nichts aus , nur ihr Resultat , und dies zes nicht . 5 . 25 Das Vorkommen der Operation charakterisiert den Sinn des Sat- Ausdruck bringen . etc . Variable sind , die gewisse formale Relationen allgemein zum u . s . f . Dies kann nur darin ausgedrückt sein , dass „p“ , „q“ , „r“ , 5 . 242 Dieselbe Operation , die „q“ aus „p“ macht , macht aus „q“ „r“ terschied der Formen . 5 . 241 Die Operation kennzeichnet keine Form , sondern nur den Un- der Operation sind eben die Basen . Und das Gemeinsame zwischen den Basen und dem Resultat Sie bringt den Unterschied der Formen zum Ausdruck . von einer Form von Sätzen zu einer anderen gelangen kann . 5 . 24 Die Operation zeigt sich in einer Variablen ; sie zeigt , wie man Die Verneinung verkehrt den Sinn des Satzes . etc . sind Operationen . Verneinung , logische Addition , logische Multiplikation , etc . , Sinnes von p . 5 . 2341 Der Sinn einer Wahrheitsfunktion von pist eine Funktion des diese Operationen Wahrheitsoperationen . Operationen , die die Elementarsätze als Basen haben . Ich nenne 5 . 234 Die Wahrheitsfunktionen der Elementarsätze sind Resultate von wo die logische Konstruktion des Satzes anfängt . LOGISCH-PHILOSOPHISCHE ABHANDLUNG 131 ausdrückt . tarsätzen sind , Eine Wahrheitsfunktion von Elementarsätzen auch wenn „p“ und „q“ Wahrheitsfunktionen von Elemen- Und es ist leicht zu sehen , dass das Satzzeichen in No . 4 . 442 , „p“ , „q“ , „r“ , etc . nicht Elementarsätze sind . 5 . 31 Die Schemata No . 4 . 31 haben auch dann eine Bedeutung , wenn Elementarsätzen . Jeder Satz ist das Resultat von Wahrheitsoperationen mit Resultat E i n e r Wahrheitsoperation mit Elementarsätzen . Wahrheitsoperationen mit Elementarsätzen ist wieder das Resultat jeder Wahrheitsoperation mit den Resultaten von eine Wahrheitsfunktion von Elementarsätzen , einen Satz . Das erzeugt aus Wahrheitsfunktionen von Elementarsätzen wieder aus Wahrheitsfunktionen eine Neue . Jede Wahrheitsoperation che Weise , wie aus den Elementarsätzen ihre Wahrheitsfunktion , Nach dem Wesen der Wahrheitsoperation wird auf die glei- Elementarsätzen die Wahrheitsfunktion entsteht . Die Wahrheitsoperation ist die Art und Weise , wie aus den Elementarsätzen . 5 . 3 Alle Sätze sind Resultate von Wahrheitsoperationen mit den „∼∼p“ , ∼∼p=p ) . 5 . 254 Die Operation kann verschwinden z . B . die Verneinung in chen . Operationen können einander aufheben . 5 . 253 Eine Operation kann die Wirkung einer anderen rückgängig ma- valent mit dem Begriff „und so weiter“ . 5 . 2523 Der Begriff der successiven Anwendung der Operation ist äqui- der Reihe , welches auf xunmittelbar folgt . Gliedes xder Reihe und das dritte die Form desjenigen Gliedes Anfang der Formenreihe , das zweite die Form eines beliebigen eine Variable . Das erste Glied des Klammerausdruckes ist der schreibe ich daher so : „ [ a , x , O0x ] “ . Dieser Klammerausdruck ist 5 . 2522 Das allgemeine Glied einer Formenreihe a , O0a , O0O0a , wendung m e h r e r e r Operationen auf eine Anzahl von Sätzen . In einem ähnlichen Sinne rede ich von der successiven An- „a“ ) . Resultat der dreimaligen successiven Anwendung von „O0ξ“ auf LOGISCH-PHILOSOPHISCHE ABHANDLUNG 132 5 . 441 Dieses Verschwinden der scheinbaren logischen Konstanten tritt dann eben von ∼handeln , der andere nicht . „∼∼p“ etwas anderes sagen als „p“ . Denn der eine Satz würde Und gäbe es einen Gegenstand , der „∼“ hiesse , so müsste nung in der Bejahung bereits präjudiziert . einem Gegenstand ; wohl aber ist die Möglichkeit der Vernei- Der Satz „∼∼p“ handelt nicht von der Verneinung wie von es p ; oder beides ? —in der Bejahung enthalten ? Verneint „∼∼p“∼p , oder bejaht erzeugen kann , ist dann die Verneinung—in irgend einem Sinn Wenn man z . B . eine Bejahung durch doppelte Verneinung 5 . 44 Die Wahrheitsfunktionen sind keine materiellen Funktionen . Alle Sätze der Logik sagen aber dasselbe . Nämlich Nichts . halben Dutzend „Grundgesetzen“ folgen . liche Anzahl der Sätze der Logik der Mathematik ) aus einem zu glauben . Und nicht weniger merkwürdig ist , dass die unend- ten , nämlich ∼∼p , ∼∼∼∼p , etc . , ist doch von vornherein kaum 5 . 43 Dass aus einer Tatsache punendlich viele a n d e r e folgen soll- identisch ist . U . s . w . „∨“ mit „∼“ definieren und dass dieses „∨“ mit dem ersten und „∨“ definieren , identisch ist mit dem , durch welches wir Und es ist offenbar , dass das „⊃“ , welches wir durch „∼“ bezeichnen . Urzeichen sind , und schon erst recht , dass sie keine Relationen „Urzeichen“ Freges und Russells zeigt schon , dass dies keine Die Möglichkeit des kreuzweisen Definierens der logischen links etc . sind , leuchtet ein . 5 . 42 Dass ∨ , ⊃ , etc . nicht Beziehungen im Sinne von rechts und funktion von Elementarsätzen sind . funktionen sind identisch , welche eine und dieselbe Wahrheits- 5 . 41 Denn : Alle Resultate von Wahrheitsoperationen mit Wahrheits- Konstante“ im Sinne Freges und Russells ) nicht gibt . 5 . 4 Hier zeigt es sich , dass es „logische Gegenstände“ , „logische die Elementarsätze . wendung einer endlichen Anzahl von Wahrheitsoperationen auf 5 . 32 Alle Wahrheitsfunktionen sind Resultate der successiven An- LOGISCH-PHILOSOPHISCHE ABHANDLUNG 133 Stellung in der Logik muss nun erklärt werden . Wo muss dieser Behelf nun im m e r angewandt werden ? Seine Stelle als nötig erwiesen , so muss man sich nun sofort fragen : Hat sich aber die Einführung eines neuen Behelfes an einer unerlaubt ist . gung . Sie fehlt und muss fehlen , da das Vorgehen tatsächlich Warum hier plötzlich Worte ? Dies bedürfte einer Rechtferti- und Whitehead Definitionen und Grundgesetze in Worten vor . So kommen in den „Principia Mathematica“ von Russell den . Miene—in Klammern oder unter dem Striche eingeführt wer- er Behelf darf in die Logik—sozusagen , mit ganz unschuldiger Logik muss immer ein folgenschweres Ereignis sein . Kein neu- 5 . 452 Die Einführung eines neuen Behelfes in den Symbolismus der für die Einführung von Zeichen durch Definitionen gesagt hat . tandis , dasselbe , was Frege „Grundgesetze der Arithmetik“ ) Kurz , für die Einführung der Urzeichen gilt , mutatis mu- dieselbe Art der Zeichenverbindung zu benützen . che wäre und es wäre kein Grund vorhanden , in beiden Fällen dann zweifelhaft , ob ihre Bedeutung in beiden Fällen die glei- se von Fällen , dann für die andere einführen , denn es bliebe „ ( ∃x ) . ∼fx“ u . a . Wir dürfen sie nicht erst für die eine Klas- Form „∼p“ ebenso verstehen , wie in Sätzen wie „∼ ( p∨q ) “ , neinung eingeführt , so müssen wir sie jetzt in Sätzen von der dann noch einmal für eine andere einführen . Z . B . Ist die Ver- kommt . Man kann ihn also nicht zuerst für e i n e Verbindung , allen Verbindungen eingeführt sein , worin er überhaupt vor- abhängig sein . Ist ein Grundbegriff eingeführt , so muss er in 5 . 451 Hat die Logik Grundbegriffe , so müssen sie von einander un- Der Bau der Logik a u s ihren Urzeichen muss klar werden . Stellung zueinander klar machen und ihr Dasein rechtfertigen . 5 . 45 Gibt es logische Urzeichen , so muss eine richtige Logik ihre ben , gegeben . die Resultate aller Wahrheitsoperationen , die ihn zur Basis ha- 5 . 442 Wenn uns ein Satz gegeben ist , so sind m i t i hm auch schon „ ( ∃x ) . fx . x=a“ dasselbe wie „fa“ . auch ein , wenn „∼ ( ∃x ) . ∼fx“ dasselbe sagt wie „ ( x ) . fx“ , oder LOGISCH-PHILOSOPHISCHE ABHANDLUNG 134 enthalten . Denn „fa“ sagt dasselbe wie „ ( ∃x ) . fx . x=a“ . Sind ja schon im Elementarsatze alle logischen Operationen lassen muss . über die Form aller Sätze sagen lässt , sich a u f e i n m a l sagen 5 . 47 Es ist klar , dass alles was sich überhaupt vo n vo r n h e r e i n 5 . 4611 Die logischen Operationszeichen sind Interpunktionen . die Klammern eine selbständige Bedeutung haben . Urzeichen sind . Und es wird doch wohl niemand glauben , dass chen deutet ja schon darauf hin , dass diese nicht die wirklichen Die Benützung der Klammern mit jenen scheinbaren Urzei- dürfen—im Gegensatz zu den wirklichen Beziehungen . logischen Scheinbeziehungen , wie ∨und ⊃ , der Klammern be- 5 . 461 Bedeutungsvoll ist die scheinbar unwichtige Tatsache , dass die allgemeinste Form ihrer Kombinationen . Urzeichen nicht die „p∨q“ , „ ( ∃x ) . fx“ , etc . sind , sondern die damit wäre es klar geworden , dass die eigentlichen allgemeinen nur möglichen Kombinationen von Klammern eingeführt . Und ∼q ) “ etc . etc . Man hätte damit auch schon die Wirkung aller eingeführt ; also nicht nur „p∨q“ sondern auch schon „∼ ( p∨ man damit auch schon den Sinn aller ihrer Kombinationen 5 . 46 Wenn man die logischen Zeichen richtig einführte , so hätte Ein Gebiet , in dem der Satz gilt : simplex sigillum veri . liegen . und zu einem abgeschlossenen , regelmässigen Gebilde vereint- Fragen geben müsse , deren Antworten—a priori—symmetrisch , Die Menschen haben immer geahnt , dass es ein Gebiet von denn sie setzen den Standard der Einfachheit . 5 . 4541 Die Lösungen der logischen Probleme müssen einfach sein , geben . In der Logik kann es nicht Allgemeineres und Spezielleres fikation geben . 5 . 454 In der Logik gibt es kein Nebeneinander , kann es keine Klassi- Es gibt keine ausgezeichneten Zahlen . Logik keine Zahlen gibt . Oder vielmehr : Es muss sich herausstellen , dass es in der 5 . 453 Alle Zahlen der Logik müssen sich rechtfertigen lassen . LOGISCH-PHILOSOPHISCHE ABHANDLUNG 135 Wenn wir auch glauben , es getan zu haben . gegeben haben . liegen , dass wir einigen seiner Bestandteile keine B e d e u t u n g bildet , und wenn er keinen Sinn hat , so kann das nur daran haben ; und ich sage : Jeder mögliche Satz ist rechtmässig ge- 5 . 4733 Frege sagt : Jeder rechtmässig gebildete Satz muss einen Sinn Zeichen , die ke i n e n Zweck erfüllen , logisch bedeutungslos . Zeichen , die E i n e n Zweck erfüllen , sind logisch äquivalent , u n n ö t i g e Zeicheneinheiten nichts bedeuten . ren praktischen Erfolg gerechtfertigte , Regel : Sie besagt , dass 5 . 47321 Occams Devise ist natürlich keine willkürliche , oder durch ih- 5 . 4732 Wir können einem Zeichen nicht den unrechten Sinn geben . besteht darin , dass nicht unlogisch gedacht werden ka n n . jeden logischen Fehler verhindert . —Dass die Logik a priori ist , durch in der Logik entbehrlich werden , dass die Sprache selbst 5 . 4731 Das Einleuchten , von dem Russell so viel sprach , kann nur da- irren . Wir können uns , in gewissem Sinne , nicht in der Logik weil das Symbol an und für sich unerlaubt wäre . kürliche Bestimmung nicht getroffen haben , aber nicht darum , die „identisch“ heisst . Der Satz ist unsinnig , weil wir eine will- identisch“ heisst darum nichts , weil es keine Eigenschaft gibt , les was in der Logik möglich ist , ist auch erlaubt . „Sokrates ist Ein m ö g l i ch e s Zeichen muss auch bezeichnen können . Al- 5 . 473 Die Logik muss für sich selber sorgen . bung des einen und einzigen allgemeinen Urzeichens der Logik . 5 . 472 Die Beschreibung der allgemeinsten Satzform ist die Beschrei- schreibung angeben , also das Wesen der Welt . 5 . 4711 Das Wesen des Satzes angeben , heisst , das Wesen aller Be- 5 . 471 Die allgemeine Satzform ist das Wesen des Satzes . Das aber ist die allgemeine Satzform . a l l e Sätze , ihrer Natur nach , mit einander gemein haben . Man könnte sagen : Die Eine logische Konstante ist das , was on , und wo diese sind , sind bereits alle logischen Konstanten . Wo Zusammengesetztheit ist , da ist Argument und Funkti- LOGISCH-PHILOSOPHISCHE ABHANDLUNG 136 Variablen einfach ihre konstanten Werte setzen . 2 . Die Angabe 1 . Die direkte Aufzählung . In diesem Fall können wir statt der Wir k ö n n e n drei Arten der Beschreibung unterscheiden : geschieht , ist unwesentlich . Wie die Beschreibung der Glieder des Klammerausdruckes Variable vertritt . Die Festsetzung ist die Beschreibung der Sätze , welche die Die Werte der Variablen werden festgesetzt . R ) . Hat also ξetwa die 3 Werte P , Q , R , so ist ξ ) = P , Q , sämtlichen Werte in der Klammer vertritt . sind ; und der Strich über der Variablen deutet an , dass sie ihre eine Variable , deren Werte die Glieder des Klammerausdruckes gültig ist—durch ein Zeichen von der Form „ ( ξ ) “ an . „ξ“ ist —wenn die Reihenfolge der Glieder in der Klammer gleich- 5 . 501 Einen Klammerausdruck , dessen Glieder Sätze sind , deute ich Klammer und ich nenne sie die Negation dieser Sätze . Diese Operation verneint sämtliche Sätze in der rechten ze . wendung der Operation – – – – –W ) ( ξ , auf Elementarsät- 5 . 5 Jede Wahrheitsfunktion ist ein Resultat der successiven An- sondern um den Ausdruck einer Regel . G r u n d b e g r i f f e n handelt , die bezeichnet werden müssen , 5 . 476 Es ist klar , dass es sich hier nicht um eine A nz ah l vo n thematischen Mannigfaltigkeit—zu bilden . stimmten Anzahl von Dimensionen—von einer bestimmten ma- 5 . 475 Es kommt nur darauf an , ein Zeichensystem von einer be- serer Notation ab . 5 . 474 Die Anzahl der nötigen Grundoperationen hängt nu r von un- das Zeichen zufällig miteinander gemein . beiden Fällen ganz verschieden ; die beiden Symbole haben nur nende Beziehung ist eine andere , —also ist auch das Symbol in so symbolisiert es auf ganz andere Art und Weise—die bezeich- gegeben haben . Denn , wenn es als Gleichheitszeichen auftritt , Wort „identisch“ als E i g e n s ch a f t s w o r t ke i n e Bedeutung So sagt „Sokrates ist identisch“ darum nichts , weil wir dem LOGISCH-PHILOSOPHISCHE ABHANDLUNG 137 dasselbe sagt wie „q“ ; dass „p∨∼p“ nichts sagt . Es zeigt sich so auch in Russells Notation , dass „q : p∨∼p“ der ganz ausserhalb seiner liegt . Jeder Satz hat nur ein Negativ , weil es nur einen Satz gibt , gengesetzt , wenn sie nichts miteinander gemein haben , und : Und so kann man sagen : Zwei Sätze sind einander entge- Symbole , die entweder poder qbejahen , ist der Satz „p∨q“ . pals qbejahen , ist der Satz „p . q“ . Das Gemeinsame aller 5 . 513 Man könnte sagen : Das Gemeinsame aller Symbole , die sowohl dies Gemeinsame spiegelt die Verneinung wider . „∼p∨∼p“ , „∼p ∼p“ , etc . etc . ad inf . gebildet werden . Und Also die gemeinsame Regel , nach welcher „∼p“ , „∼∼∼p“ , nen , gemeinsam ist . dasjenige , was allen Zeichen dieser Notation , welche pvernei- Das , was in „∼p“ verneint , ist aber nicht das „∼“ , sondern „∼“ mit der Wirklichkeit zum Stimmen bringen ? „∼p“ ist „p“ ein falscher Satz . Wie kann ihn nun der Strich 5 . 512 „∼p“ ist wahr , wenn „p“ falsch ist . Also in dem wahren Satz Spiegel , verknüpfen . le diese zu einem unendlich feinen Netzwerk , zu dem grossen Haken und Manipulationen gebrauchen ? Nur , indem sich al- 5 . 511 Wie kann die allumfassende , weltspiegelnde Logik so spezielle Werte , so ist N ( ξ ) = ∼p ∼q ( weder pnoch q ) . 5 . 51 Hat ξnur einen Wert , so ist N ( ξ ) = ∼p ( nicht p ) , hat es zwei den können . zu bilden sind , so muss dies auch einen exakten Ausdruck fin- tion Sätze gebildet werden können und wie Sätze mit ihr nicht 5 . 503 Da sich offenbar leicht ausdrücken lässt , wie mit dieser Opera- ξ . N ( ξ ) ist die Negation sämtlicher Werte der Satzvariablen 5 . 502 Ich schreibe also statt „ ( – – – – –W ) ( ξ , “ „N ( ξ ) “ . Formenreihe . sind die Glieder des Klammerausdrucks sämtliche Glieder einer setzes , nach welchem jene Sätze gebildet sind . In diesem Falle beschreibenden Sätze sind . 3 . Die Angabe eines formalen Ge- einer Funktion fx , deren Werte für alle Werte von xdie zu LOGISCH-PHILOSOPHISCHE ABHANDLUNG 138 5 . 523 Die Allgemeinheitsbezeichnung tritt als Argument auf . sie Konstante hervorhebt . dass sie auf ein logisches Urbild hinweist , und zweitens , dass 5 . 522 Das Eigentümliche der Allgemeinheitsbezeichnung ist erstens , in welchen beide Ideen beschlossen liegen , zu verstehen . führt . So wurde es schwer , die Sätze „ ( ∃x ) . fx“ und „ ( x ) . f x“ , mit dem logischen Produkt oder der logischen Summe einge- Frege und Russell haben die Allgemeinheit in Verbindung 5 . 521 Ich trenne den Begriff A l l e von der Wahrheitsfunktion . alle Werte von x , so wird N ( ξ ) = ∼ ( ∃x ) . fx . 5 . 52 Sind die Werte von ξsämtliche Werte einer Funktion f x für voraussetzen und umgekehrt . Der positive S a t z muss die Existenz des negativen S a t z e s positiven gebildet . Aber auch hier ist ja der negative Satz indirekt durch den steht , könnte das ausdrücken , dass aRb nicht der Fall ist . Etwa : Wenn „a“ nicht in einer bestimmten Beziehung zu „b“ Satz nicht durch eine negative Tatsache ausdrücken können . positiven gebildet werden ? Warum sollte man den negativen 5 . 5151 Muss das Zeichen des negativen Satzes mit dem Zeichen des keinen Sinn haben . Wenn aber „p∨p“ keinen Sinn hat , dann kann auch „p∨q“ gleichsinnigen Zeichen „p∨p“ , „p . p“ , etc . keinen Sinn haben . allein nicht Sinn haben ; dann können aber auch die mit „p“ in „p∨q“ nicht für ein komplexes Zeichen steht , dann kann es setzt ja selbst das „∨“ , „∼“ , etc . voraus . Wenn das Zeichen „p“ Und dies ist auch der Fall , denn das Symbol „p“ und „q“ „∨“ , „ . “ , etc . miteinander verbunden ist , Sätze sein müssen . 5 . 515 Es muss sich an unseren Symbolen zeigen , dass das , was durch sich ihr Sinn wider . se Regeln sind den Symbolen äquivalent und in ihnen spiegelt der alle poder qbejahenden Sätze gebildet werden , u . s . f . Die- der alle pbejahenden Sätze gebildet werden , eine Regel , nach der alle pverneinenden Sätze gebildet werden , eine Regel , nach 5 . 514 Ist eine Notation festgelegt , so gibt es in ihr eine Regel , nach LOGISCH-PHILOSOPHISCHE ABHANDLUNG 139 Zeichen . Verschiedenheit der Gegenstände durch Verschiedenheit der Zeichens aus , und nicht mit Hilfe eines Gleichheitszeichens . 5 . 53 Gleichheit des Gegenstandes drücke ich durch Gleichheit des falls Ein Elementarsatz m e h r wahr . Wenn ein Elementarsatz wahr ist , so ist damit doch jeden- begrenzen . wird , ist eben derjenige , welchen die ganz allgemeinen Sätze ihrem Bau durch die Gesamtheit der Elementarsätze gelassen am allgemeinen Bau der Welt . Und der Spielraum , welcher 5 . 5262 Es verändert ja die Wahr- oder Falschheit je d e s Satzes etwas mit a n d e r e n Symbolen gemeinsam . Kennzeichen des zusammengesetzten Symbols : Es hat etwas im unverallgemeinerten Satz . hen unabhängig in bezeichnenden Beziehungen zur Welt , wie „ ( ∃x , φ ) . φx“ „φ“ und „x“ getrennt erwähnen müssen . Beide ste- re Satz zusammengesetzt . Dies zeigt sich daran , dass wir in 5 . 5261 Ein vollkommen verallgemeinerter Satz ist , wie jeder ande- ein x , welches “ sagen : Und dies xist a . muss man einfach nach einem Ausdruck „es gibt ein und nur Um dann auf die gewöhnliche Ausdrucksweise zu kommen , nen . men von vornherein einem bestimmten Gegenstand zuzuord- nerte Sätze beschreiben , das heisst also , ohne irgend einen Na- 5 . 526 Man kann die Welt vollständig durch vollkommen verallgemei- te , muss schon im Symbol selber liegen . Jener Präzedenzfall , auf den man sich immer berufen möch- Kontradiktion ist . ein Ausdruck eine Tautologie , ein sinnvoller Satz , oder eine wird nicht durch einen Satz ausgedrückt , sondern dadurch , dass Gewissheit , Möglichkeit oder Unmöglichkeit einer Sachlage Worten durch „f x ist m ö g l i ch“ wiederzugeben . 5 . 525 Es ist unrichtig , den Satz „ ( ∃x ) . fx“—wie Russell dies tut—in a l l e Elementarsätze gegeben . Wenn die Elementarsätze gegeben sind , so sind damit auch schon a l l e Gegenstände gegeben . 5 . 524 Wenn die Gegenstände gegeben sind , so sind uns damit auch LOGISCH-PHILOSOPHISCHE ABHANDLUNG 140 bringt , sind schon hier zu lösen . Alle Probleme , die Russells „Axiom of Infinity“ mit sich sätze geknüpft waren . 5 . 535 Damit erledigen sich auch alle Probleme , die an solche Schein- richtigen Begriffsschrift gar nicht hinschreiben lassen . c . ⊃a=c“ , „ ( x ) . x =x“ , „ ( ∃x ) . x =a“ , etc . sich in einer 5 . 534 Und nun sehen wir , dass Scheinsätze wie : „a=a“ , „a=b . b= der Begriffsschrift . 5 . 533 Das Gleichheitszeichen ist also kein wesentlicher Bestandteil ∼ ( ∃x , y ) . fx fy“ . Und der Satz „nu r Ein xbefriedigt f ( “ lautet : „ ( ∃x ) . fx fa ∼ ( ∃x , y ) . fx fy“ . 5 . 5321 Statt „ ( x ) fx ⊃x=a“ schreiben wir also z . B . „ ( ∃x ) . fx . ⊃ f ( x , y ) . ∨ . ∃x ) . f ( x , x ) “ . Also statt des Russell’schen „ ( ∃x , y ) . f ( x , y ) “ : „ ( ∃x , y ) . f ( x , y ) “ . f ( x , x ) “ ; und nicht „ ( ∃x , y ) . f ( x , y ) . ∼x=y“ , sondern „ ( ∃x , y ) . 5 . 532 Und analog : Nicht „ ( ∃x , y ) . f ( x , y ) . x =y“ , sondern „ ( ∃x ) . „f ( b , b ) “ ) . Und nicht „f ( a , b ) . ∼a=b“ , sondern „f ( a , b ) “ . 5 . 531 Ich schreibe also nicht „f ( a , b ) . a =b“ , sondern „f ( a , a ) “ oder identisch mit sich selbst , sagt gar nichts . identisch , ist ein Unsinn , und von E i n e m zu sagen , es sei 5 . 5303 Beiläufig gesprochen : Von z we i Dingen zu sagen , sie seien er doch S i n n . gemeinsam haben . Selbst wenn dieser Satz nie richtig ist , hat nicht sagen kann , dass zwei Gegenstände alle Eigenschaften 5 . 5302 Russells Definition von „=“ genügt nicht ; weil man nach ihr wir das Gleichheitszeichen selber . Beziehung zu ahabe , aber um dies auszudrücken , brauchten Man könnte nun freilich sagen , dass eben nu r adiese Beziehung zu ahaben . nur solche Dinge der Funktion fgenügen , welche eine gewisse einfach , dass n u r ader Funktion fgenügt , und nicht , dass „ ( x ) fx . ⊃ . x =a“ betrachtet . Was dieser Satz sagt , ist leuchtet ein . Dies wird sehr klar , wenn man z . B . den Satz 5 . 5301 Dass die Identität keine Relation zwischen Gegenständen ist , LOGISCH-PHILOSOPHISCHE ABHANDLUNG 141 sich nicht um eine Zuordnung von einer Tatsache und einem sagt p“ von der Form „‚p‘ sagt p“ sind : Und hier handelt es 5 . 542 Es ist aber klar , dass „A glaubt , dass p“ , „A denkt p“ , „A etc . sind jene Sätze auch so aufgefasst worden . Und in der modernen Erkenntnistheorie Russell , Moore , zu einem Gegenstand A in einer Art von Relation . Hier scheint es nämlich oberflächlich , als stünde der Satz p glaubt , dass pder Fall ist“ , oder „A denkt p“ , etc . Besonders in gewissen Satzformen der Psychologie , wie „A anderen auch auf andere Weise vorkommen . 5 . 541 Auf den ersten Blick scheint es , als könne ein Satz in einem Basis der Wahrheitsoperationen vor . 5 . 54 In der allgemeinen Satzform kommt der Satz im Satze nur als mit sich selbst identisch wären ? nicht auch wahr , wenn es zwar „Dinge gäbe“ , aber diese nicht „∼ ( ∃x ) . x =x“ . Aber selbst wenn dies ein Satz wäre , —wäre er 5 . 5352 Ebenso wollte man „Es gibt keine D i n g e“ ausdrücken durch sinnlose Hypothese . ten Argumenten bewahrt , wie die zu diesem Zweck angehängte also sich selbst ebenso gut , oder so schlecht , vor den unrech- durch die unrichtige Gattung von Argumenten unsinnig wird , nicht falsch , sondern unsinnig wird , und weil der Satz selbst chern , weil die Hypothese für einen Nicht-Satz als Argument Satz zu stellen , um ihm Argumente der richtigen Form zu si- Es ist schon darum Unsinn , die Hypothese p⊃pvor einen werden könnten . gestellt , damit deren Argumentstellen nur von Sätzen besetzt „p⊃p“ wiedergegeben und als Hypothese vor gewisse Sätze Mathematics“ den Unsinn „pist ein Satz“ in Symbolen durch Ding , etc . reden möchte . So hat Russell in den „Principles of Und zwar geschieht dies , wenn man von dem Urbild : Satz , von der Form „a=a“ oder „p⊃p“ u . dgl . zu benützen . 5 . 5351 Es gibt gewisse Fälle , wo man in Versuchung gerät , Ausdrücke mit verschiedener Bedeutung gäbe . Sprache dadurch ausdrücken , dass es unendlich viele Namen Das , was das Axiom of infinity sagen soll , würde sich in der LOGISCH-PHILOSOPHISCHE ABHANDLUNG 142 sen muss . die Logik entscheiden lässt , sich ohne weiteres entscheiden las- 5 . 551 Unser Grundsatz ist , dass jede Frage , die sich überhaupt durch Elementarsatzes angeben . können , so können wir auch nicht die Zusammensetzung des Anzahl der Namen von verschiedener Bedeutung nicht angeben Der Elementarsatz besteht aus Namen . Da wir aber die Elementarsätze a priori beantworten . 5 . 55 Wir müssen nun die Frage nach allen möglichen Formen der erscheint avorne ; und umgekehrt . Sehe ich erst auf die Ecken aund nur flüchtig auf b , so Tatsachen . Erscheinungen . Denn wir sehen eben wirklich zwei verschiedene auf zweierlei Art als Würfel sehen kann ; und alle ähnlichen Dies erklärt wohl auch , dass man die Figur seine Bestandteile so und so zu einander verhalten . 5 . 5423 Einen Komplex wahrnehmen , heisst , wahrnehmen , dass sich sells Theorie genügt dieser Bedingung nicht . zeigen , dass es unmöglich ist , einen Unsinn zu urteilen . Rus- 5 . 5422 Die richtige Erklärung der Form des Satzes „A urteilt p“ muss mehr . Eine zusammengesetzte Seele wäre nämlich keine Seele Unding ist . der heutigen oberflächlichen Psychologie aufgefasst wird , ein 5 . 5421 Dies zeigt auch , dass die Seele—das Subjekt , etc . —wie sie in Zuordnung ihrer Gegenstände . Gegenstand , sondern um die Zuordnung von Tatsachen durch LOGISCH-PHILOSOPHISCHE ABHANDLUNG 143 erfinden . muss ich es zu tun haben , was es mir möglich macht , sie zu Formen zu tun hätte , die ich erfinden kann ; sondern mit dem Und wie wäre es auch möglich , dass ich es in der Logik mit zelnen Symbole . dort ist dieses System das logisch wichtige und nicht die ein- Wo man aber Symbole nach einem System bilden kann , sehen von seiner besonderen logischen Form . 5 . 555 Es ist klar , wir haben vom Elementarsatz einen Begriff , abge- der-Fall-sein kann ? Hat die Frage einen Sinn : Was muss s e i n , damit etwas chen könne ? Zeichenform aufstellen und nicht wissen , ob ihr etwas entspre- 5 . 5542 Dürfen wir denn aber überhaupt so fragen ? Können wir eine tion bezeichnen zu müssen . kommen kann , etwas mit dem Zeichen einer 27-stelligen Rela- 5 . 5541 Es soll sich a priori angeben lassen , ob ich z . B . in die Lage 5 . 554 Die Angabe jeder speziellen Form wäre vollkommen willkürlich . Eine ausgezeichnete Zahl gibt es nicht . Erfahrung ? chen Anzahlen ? Und wie soll sich das entscheiden ? —Durch die denen Anzahlen von Dingen Individuals ) . Aber zwischen wel- 5 . 553 Russell sagte , es gäbe einfache Relationen zwischen verschie- es eine Welt gibt . es keine Welt gäbe , wie könnte es dann eine Logik geben , da den ? Man könnte sagen : Wenn es eine Logik gäbe , auch wenn 5 . 5521 Und wenn dies nicht so wäre , wie könnten wir die Logik anwen- Sie ist vor dem Wie , nicht vor dem Was . Die Logik ist vo r jeder Erfahrung—dass etwas so ist . etwas i s t : aber das ist eben ke i n e Erfahrung . ist nicht die , dass sich etwas so und so verhält , sondern , dass 5 . 552 Die „Erfahrung“ , die wir zum Verstehen der Logik brauchen , dass wir auf grundfalscher Fährte sind . durch Ansehen der Welt beantworten zu müssen , so zeigt dies , Und wenn wir in die Lage kommen , ein solches Problem LOGISCH-PHILOSOPHISCHE ABHANDLUNG 144 Möglichkeiten ausschliessen und dies kann nicht der Fall sein , Das würde nämlich scheinbar voraussetzen , dass wir gewisse es in der Welt , jenes nicht . Wir können also in der Logik nicht sagen : Das und das gibt Grenzen . 5 . 61 Die Logik erfüllt die Welt ; die Grenzen der Welt sind auch ihre meiner Welt . 5 . 6 D i e G r e n z e n m e i n e r S p r a ch e bedeuten die Grenzen muss es zu offenbarem Unsinn führen , sie angeben zu wollen . 5 . 5571 Wenn ich die Elementarsätze nicht a priori angeben kann , dann übergreifen . Also dürfen die Logik und ihre Anwendung einander nicht Aber die Logik muss sich mit ihrer Anwendung berühren . kollidieren . Das ist klar : Die Logik darf mit ihrer Anwendung nicht nehmen . Was in der Anwendung liegt , kann die Logik nicht voraus- mentarsätze es gibt . 5 . 557 Die A n we n d u n g der Logik entscheidet darüber , welche Ele- konkretesten , die es gibt . Unsere Probleme sind nicht abstrakt , sondern vielleicht die sondern die volle Wahrheit selbst . wir hier angeben sollen , ist nicht ein Gleichnis der Wahrheit , sie sind , logisch vollkommen geordnet . —Jenes Einfachste , was 5 . 5563 Alle Sätze unserer Umgangssprache sind tatsächlich , so wie unanalysierten Form versteht . geben muss , dann muss es jeder wissen , der die Sätze in ihrer 5 . 5562 Wissen wir aus rein logischen Gründen , dass es Elementarsätze lität sein . Die Hierarchien sind , und müssen unabhängig von der Rea- der Elementarsätze . Gegenstände . Die Grenze zeigt sich wieder in der Gesamtheit 5 . 5561 Die empirische Realität ist begrenzt durch die Gesamtheit der hen . geben . Nur was wir selbst konstruieren , können wir vorausse- 5 . 556 Eine Hierarchie der Formen der Elementarsätze kann es nicht LOGISCH-PHILOSOPHISCHE ABHANDLUNG 145 5 . 6331 Das Gesichtsfeld hat nämlich nicht etwa eine solche Form : dass es von einem Auge gesehen wird . Und nichts a m G e s i c ht s f e l d lässt darauf schliessen , sichtsfeld . Aber das Auge siehst du wirklich n i cht . Du sagst , es verhält sich hier ganz , wie mit Auge und Ge- 5 . 633 Wo in der Welt ist ein metaphysisches Subjekt zu merken ? der Welt . 5 . 632 Das Subjekt gehört nicht zur Welt , sondern es ist eine Grenze sem Buche n i cht die Rede sein . — Sinne kein Subjekt gibt : Von ihm allein nämlich könnte in die- isolieren , oder vielmehr zu zeigen , dass es in einem wichtigen che nicht etc . , dies ist nämlich eine Methode , das Subjekt zu zu sagen , welche Glieder meinem Willen unterstehen und wel- fand“ , so wäre darin auch über meinen Leib zu berichten und Wenn ich ein Buch schriebe „Die Welt , wie ich sie vor- 5 . 631 Das denkende , vorstellende , Subjekt gibt es nicht . 5 . 63 Ich bin meine Welt . Der Mikrokosmos . 5 . 621 Die Welt und das Leben sind Eins . die Grenzen m e i n e r Welt bedeuten . die Grenzen d e r Sprache der Sprache , die allein ich verstehe ) Dass die Welt m ei ne Welt ist , das zeigt sich darin , dass lässt es sich nicht s a g e n , sondern es zeigt sich . Was der Solipsismus nämlich m e i nt , ist ganz richtig , nur ge , inwieweit der Solipsismus eine Wahrheit ist . 5 . 62 Diese Bemerkung gibt den Schlüssel zur Entscheidung der Fra- können . ken ; wir können also auch nicht s a g e n , was wir nicht denken Was wir nicht denken können , das können wir nicht den- betrachten könnte . wenn sie nämlich diese Grenzen auch von der anderen Seite da sonst die Logik über die Grenzen der Welt hinaus müsste ; LOGISCH-PHILOSOPHISCHE ABHANDLUNG 146 Ω0Ων0x= Ων+10xDef . x= Ω00xDef . und 6 . 02 Und so kommen wir zu den Zahlen : Ich definiere Satz zum anderen . Das ist die allgemeinste Form des Überganges von einem = η , ξ , N ( ξ ) ) . 6 . 01 Die allgemeine Form der Operation Ω0 ( η ) ist also : ξ , N ( ξ ) 0 ( η ) kann . einem Satz durch eine Operation ein anderer erzeugt werden damit auch schon die allgemeine Form davon gegeben , wie aus 6 . 002 Ist die allgemeine Form gegeben , wie ein Satz gebaut ist , so ist tarsätze ist . successiven Anwendung der Operation N0 ( ξ ) auf die Elemen- 6 . 001 Dies sagt nichts anderes , als dass jeder Satz ein Resultat der Dies ist die allgemeine Form des Satzes . 6 Die allgemeine Form der Wahrheitsfunktion ist : p , ξ , N ( ξ ) . Grenze—nicht ein Teil der Welt . Psychologie handelt , sondern das metaphysische Subjekt , die menschliche Körper , oder die menschliche Seele , von der die Das philosophische Ich ist nicht der Mensch , nicht der meine Welt ist“ . Das Ich tritt in die Philosophie dadurch ein , dass die „Welt nicht-psychologisch vom Ich die Rede sein kann . 5 . 641 Es gibt also wirklich einen Sinn , in welchem in der Philosophie es bleibt die ihm koordinierte Realität . mus schrumpft zum ausdehnungslosen Punkt zusammen , und dem reinen Realismus zusammenfällt . Das Ich des Solipsis- 5 . 64 Hier sieht man , dass der Solipsismus , streng durchgeführt , mit Es gibt keine Ordnung der Dinge a priori . anders sein . Alles , was wir überhaupt beschreiben können , könnte auch Alles , was wir sehen , könnte auch anders sein . auch a priori ist . 5 . 634 Das hängt damit zusammen , dass kein Teil unserer Erfahrung LOGISCH-PHILOSOPHISCHE ABHANDLUNG 147 sowenig selbstverständlich , wie etwa der Satz , „alle Rosen sind scheint nun nichts weniger als selbstverständlich zu sein , eben- Tatsache , dass jeder Satz eine dieser Eigenschaften besitzt . Das schaften bezeichnen , und da erschiene es als eine merkwürdige „wahr“ und „falsch“ zwei Eigenschaften unter anderen Eigen- sind immer falsch . Man könnte z . B . glauben , dass die Worte 6 . 111 Theorien , die einen Satz der Logik gehaltvoll erscheinen lassen , schen Sätze . 6 . 11 Die Sätze der Logik sagen also Nichts . Sie sind die analyti- 6 . 1 Die Sätze der Logik sind Tautologien . wir in der Mathematik brauchen , nicht die z u f ä l l i g e ist . Dies hängt damit zusammen , dass die Allgemeinheit , welche sig . 6 . 031 Die Theorie der Klassen ist in der Mathematik ganz überflüs- 6 . 03 Die allgemeine Form der ganzen Zahl ist : 0 , ξ , ξ + 1 ] . aller speziellen Zahlengleichheiten . Und der Begriff der Zahlengleichheit ist die allgemeine Form Der Zahlbegriff ist die variable Zahl . Zahlen , die allgemeine Form der Zahl . 6 . 022 Der Zahlbegriff ist nichts anderes , als das Gemeinsame aller 6 . 021 Die Zahl ist der Exponent einer Operation . u . s . f . 0+1+1+1=3 Def . 0 + 1 + 1 = 2 Def . 0 + 1 = 1 Def . Und definiere : „ [ Ω00x , Ων0x , Ων+10x ] “ . Also schreibe ich statt „ [ x , ξ , Ω0ξ ] “ : so : Ω00x , Ω0+10x , Ω0+1+10x , Ω0+1+1+10x , Ω0x , Ω0Ω0x , Ω0Ω0Ω0x , Nach diesen Zeichenregeln schreiben wir also die Reihe x , LOGISCH-PHILOSOPHISCHE ABHANDLUNG 148 durch Klammern aus . z . B . „WqF“ , „WrF“ etc . Die Wahrheitskombinationen drücke ich Methode bedienen : Ich schreibe statt „p“ , „q“ , „r“ etc . „WpF“ , Allgemeinheitsbezeichnung vorkommt , folgender anschaulichen sich , in den Fällen , in welchen in der Tautologie keine 6 . 1203 Um eine Tautologie als solche zu erkennen , kann man auch die Kontradiktionen verwenden könnte . 6 . 1202 Es ist klar , dass man zu demselben Zweck statt der Tautologien ist , dass fa aus x ) . fx folgt . etc . etc . qaus pund p⊃qfolgt . Dass „ ( x ) . fx ⊃ : fa“ eine Tautologie q ) “ miteinander verbunden eine Tautologie ergeben , zeigt , dass Dass die Sätze „p⊃q“ , „p“ und „q“ in der Form „ ( p⊃q ) . p ) ⊃ : eine Tautologie ergeben , zeigt , dass sie einander widersprechen . 6 . 1201 Dass z . B . die Sätze „p“ und „∼p“ in der Verbindung „∼ ( p . ∼p ) “ besitzen . ergeben , zeigt also , dass sie diese Eigenschaften der Struktur der Struktur haben . Dass sie s o verbunden eine Tautologie Tautologie ergeben , dazu müssen sie bestimmte Eigenschaften Damit Sätze , auf bestimmte Art und Weise verknüpft , eine ben , das charakterisiert die Logik ihrer Bestandteile . Dass ihre Bestandteile s o verknüpft eine Tautologie erge- malen—logischen—Eigenschaften der Sprache , der Welt . 6 . 12 Dass die Sätze der Logik Tautologien sind , das z ei gt die for- Satz allein erkennen lässt . Wahrheit oder Falschheit der nicht-logischen Sätze n i c ht am so ist es auch eine der wichtigsten Tatsachen , dass sich die Tatsache schliesst die ganze Philosophie der Logik in sich . Und am Symbol allein erkennen kann , dass sie wahr sind , und diese 6 . 113 Es ist das besondere Merkmal der logischen Sätze , dass man einzigartige Stellung unter allen Sätzen geben . 6 . 112 Die richtige Erklärung der logischen Sätze muss ihnen eine dass er falsch aufgefasst wurde . senschaftlichen Satzes und dies ist das sichere Anzeichen dafür , jener Satz bekommt nun ganz den Charakter eines naturwis- entweder gelb oder rot“ klänge , auch wenn er wahr wäre . Ja , LOGISCH-PHILOSOPHISCHE ABHANDLUNG 149 Daher lautet der Satz ∼ ( p ∼q ) so : geschrieben ; die Form „ξ η“ so : „∼ξ“ wird in unserer Notation daraufhin untersuchen , ob er eine Tautologie ist . Die Form will ich z . B . den Satz ∼ ( p ∼p ) ( Gesetz des Widerspruchs ) Dies Zeichen würde also z . B . den Satz p⊃qdarstellen . Nun durch Striche auf folgende Weise : zes und der Wahrheitskombinationen der Wahrheitsargumente und die Zuordnung der Wahr- oder Falschheit des ganzen Sat- LOGISCH-PHILOSOPHISCHE ABHANDLUNG 150 Es gibt nicht , wie Russell meinte , für jede „Type“ ein ei- logischen Gesetzen unterstehen . 6 . 123 Es ist klar : Die logischen Gesetze dürfen nicht selbst wieder Formen und vom Schliessen genannt wurde . 6 . 1224 Es wird jetzt auch klar , warum die Logik die Lehre von den nen . insofern fordern , als wir eine genügende Notation fordern kön- Wahrheiten“ von uns zu „f o r d e r n“ : Wir können sie nämlich 6 . 1223 Nun wird klar , warum man oft fühlte , als wären die „logischen durch eine solche bestätigt werden können . fahrung widerlegt werden können , sondern er darf auch nicht Nicht nur muss ein Satz der Logik durch keine mögliche Er- wenig , wie sie durch die Erfahrung widerlegt werden können . ze nicht durch die Erfahrung bestätigt werden können , ebenso 6 . 1222 Dies wirft ein Licht auf die Frage , warum die logischen Sät- eine Tautologie ist . wir sie zu „p⊃q p ⊃ : q“ verbinden und nun zeigen , dass dies beiden Sätzen selbst , aber wir können es auch s o zeigen , indem Dass z . B . „q“ aus „p⊃q p“ folgt , ersehen wir aus diesen eine Tautologie , so ist klar , dass qaus pfolgt . 6 . 1221 Ergeben z . B . zwei Sätze „p“ und „q“ in der Verbindung „p⊃q“ dieser Sätze erkennen können . die formalen Eigenschaften der Sätze durch das blosse Ansehen auskommen können , da wir ja in einer entsprechenden Notation 6 . 122 Daraus ergibt sich , dass wir auch ohne die logischen Sätze wie diese Sätze logisch beschaffen sein müssen . gebracht und der Zustand des Gleichgewichts zeigt dann an , Im logischen Satz werden Sätze miteinander ins Gleichgewicht Diese Methode könnte man auch eine Nullmethode nennen . der Sätze , indem sie sie zu nichtssagenden Sätzen verbinden . 6 . 121 Die Sätze der Logik demonstrieren die logischen Eigenschaften Wahrheitskombinationen zugeordnet ist . kombinationen seines Argumentes , seine Falschheit keiner der sich , dass die Wahrheit des ganzen Satzes a l l e n Wahrheits- dung der äussersten W und F mit den innersten , so ergibt Setzen wir hier statt „q“ „p“ ein und untersuchen die Verbin- LOGISCH-PHILOSOPHISCHE ABHANDLUNG 151 man die logischen Eigenschaften des S y mb o l s berechnet . 6 . 126 Ob ein Satz der Logik angehört , kann man berechnen , indem 6 . 1251 Darum kann es in der Logik auch n i e Überraschungen geben . schen Sätze zu geben . Logik , von vornherein eine Beschreibung aller „wahren“ logi- 6 . 125 Es ist möglich , und zwar auch nach der alten Auffassung der dann sind bereits alle Sätze der Logik gegeben . wir die logische Syntax irgend einer Zeichensprache kennen , sagt die Natur der naturnotwendigen Zeichen selbst aus : Wenn mit Hilfe der Zeichen aus , was wir wollen , sondern in der Logik dieses aus : Dass heisst aber , in der Logik drücken nicht w i r chen , wäre willkürlich , manches nicht . In der Logik drückt nur dende . Wir sagten , manches an den Symbolen , die wir gebrau- Charakter haben—Tautologien sind . Hierin liegt das Entschei- bindungen von Symbolen—welche wesentlich einen bestimmten dass es etwas über die Welt anzeigen muss , dass gewisse Ver- ben : Und dies ist ihre Verbindung mit der Welt . Es ist klar , voraus , dass Namen Bedeutung , und Elementarsätze Sinn ha- mehr , sie stellen es dar . Sie „handeln“ von nichts . Sie setzen 6 . 124 Die logischen Sätze beschreiben das Gerüst der Welt , oder viel- zu schaffen hat , ob unsere Welt wirklich so ist oder nicht . nicht gilt . Es ist aber klar , dass die Logik nichts mit der Frage 6 . 1233 Es lässt sich eine Welt denken , in der das Axiom of reducibility Zufall wahr sein könnten . fühl : Dass sie , wenn wahr , so doch nur durch einen günstigen cibility“ sind nicht logische Sätze , und dies erklärt unser Ge- Menschen sind sterblich“ . Sätze , wie Russells „Axiom of redu- nen , im Gegensatz zu jener zufälligen , etwa des Satzes „alle 6 . 1232 Die logische Allgemeingültigkeit könnte man wesentlich nen- tologisch sein , als ein verallgemeinerter . gelten . Ein unverallgemeinerter Satz kann ja ebensowohl tau- Allgemein sein , heisst ja nur : Zufälligerweise für alle Dinge gültigkeit . 6 . 1231 Das Anzeichen des logischen Satzes ist n i cht die Allgemein- auf sich selbst nicht angewendet wird . genes Gesetz des Widerspruches , sondern Eines genügt , da es LOGISCH-PHILOSOPHISCHE ABHANDLUNG 152 setz ableiten , indem man einfach z . B . aus Freges Grundgeset- kürlich ist , denn man könnte die Logik ja aus Einem Grundge- 6 . 1271 Es ist klar , dass die Anzahl der „logischen Grundgesetze“ will- Jede Tautologie zeigt selbst , dass sie eine Tautologie ist . nicht wesentlich Grundgesetze und abgeleitete Sätze . 6 . 127 Alle Sätze der Logik sind gleichberechtigt , es gibt unter ihnen eigener Beweis ist . 6 . 1265 Immer kann man die Logik so auffassen , dass jeder Satz sein Satz ausdrücken . ponens . Und den modus ponens kann man nicht durch einen Jeder Satz der Logik ist ein in Zeichen dargestellter modus es so ist ; in der Logik ist jeder Satz die Form eines Beweises . 6 . 1264 Der sinnvolle Satz sagt etwas aus , und sein Beweis zeigt , dass zwei ganz verschiedene Dinge sein müssen . Beweis eines sinnvollen Satzes und der Beweis i n der Logik schen Satz a u ch . Es ist von vornherein klar , dass der logische Satz l o g i s ch aus anderen beweisen könnte , und einen logi- 6 . 1263 Es wäre ja auch zu merkwürdig , wenn man einen sinnvollen zum leichteren Erkennen der Tautologie , wo sie kompliziert ist . 6 . 1262 Der Beweis in der Logik ist nur ein mechanisches Hilfsmittel keine Überraschung . 6 . 1261 In der Logik sind Prozess und Resultat äquivalent . Darum zeigen müssen , dass sie Tautologien sind . die Sätze , von welchen der Beweis ausgeht , ja ohne Beweis gien sind , der Logik durchaus unwesentlich . Schon darum , weil Natürlich ist diese Art zu zeigen , dass ihre Sätze Tautolo- Tautologie nur Tautologien . wieder Tautologien erzeugen . Und zwar f o l g e n aus einer wisser Operationen entstehen lassen , die aus den ersten immer aus anderen logischen Sätzen durch successive Anwendung ge- Der Beweis der logischen Sätze besteht darin , dass wir sie Zeichenregeln . mern , bilden wir den logischen Satz aus anderen nach blossen Denn , ohne uns um einen Sinn und eine Bedeutung zu küm- Und dies tun wir , wenn wir einen logischen Satz „beweisen“ . LOGISCH-PHILOSOPHISCHE ABHANDLUNG 153 notwendig ist , um zu zeigen , dass die beiden Ausdrücke , die Das Wesentliche an der Gleichung ist aber , dass sie nicht aber verschiedenen Sinn . 6 . 232 Frege sagt , die beiden Ausdrücke haben dieselbe Bedeutung , „ ( 1 + 1 ) + 1 + 1 ) “ auffassen kann . Es ist eine Eigenschaft von „1+1+1+1“ , dass man es als Verneinung auffassen kann . 6 . 231 Es ist eine Eigenschaft der Bejahung , dass man sie als doppelte sie durch einander ersetzbar sind . Es charakterisiert die logische Form zweier Ausdrücke , dass selbst zeigen . dies aber der Fall ist muss sich an den beiden Ausdrücken werden , so heisst das , sie sind durch einander ersetzbar . Ob 6 . 23 Wenn zwei Ausdrücke durch das Gleichheitszeichen verbunden zeigen , zeigt die Mathematik in den Gleichungen . 6 . 22 Die Logik der Welt , die die Sätze der Logik in den Tautologien Einsichten . eigentlich jenes Wort , jenen Satz“ immer wieder zu wertvollen In der Philosophie führt die Frage „wozu gebrauchen wir angehören . andere zu schliessen , welche gleichfalls nicht der Mathematik um aus Sätzen , welche nicht der Mathematik angehören , auf chen , sondern wir benützen den mathematischen Satz nu r , 6 . 211 Im Leben ist es ja nie der mathematische Satz , den wir brau- 6 . 21 Der Satz der Mathematik drückt keinen Gedanken aus . ze . Die Sätze der Mathematik sind Gleichungen also Scheinsät- 6 . 2 Die Mathematik ist eine logische Methode . Die Logik ist transcendental . 6 . 13 Die Logik ist keine Lehre , sondern ein Spiegelbild der Welt . logischen Satzes berufen hat . Frege sich auf den Grad des Einleuchtens als Kriterium des te . Aber es ist merkwürdig , dass ein so exakter Denker wie dass dieses Grundgesetz nun nicht mehr unmittelbar einleuch- zen das logische Produkt bildet . Frege würde vielleicht sagen , LOGISCH-PHILOSOPHISCHE ABHANDLUNG 154 = Ω0Ω ) 0 ( Ω0Ω ) 0x= Ω0Ω0Ω0Ω0x= Ω1+1+1+10x= Ω40x . Ω2×20x= Ω2 ) 20x= Ω2 ) 1+10x= Ω20Ω20x= Ω1+10Ω1+10x Ων ) µ0x= Ων×µ0xDef . 6 . 241 So lautet der Beweis des Satzes 2×2 = 4 : Gleichungen entsprechend , Ausdrücke durch andere ersetzen . Gleichungen zu neuen Gleichungen vor , indem wir , den Ausdrücke aus und wir schreiten von einer Anzahl von Denn die Gleichungen drücken die Ersetzbarkeit zweier men , ist die Substitutionsmethode . 6 . 24 Die Methode der Mathematik , zu ihren Gleichungen zu kom- dass jeder Satz der Mathematik sich von selbst verstehen muss . chungen zu arbeiten . Auf dieser Methode beruht es nämlich , 6 . 2341 Das Wesentliche der mathematischen Methode ist es , mit Glei- 6 . 234 Die Mathematik ist eine Methode der Logik . Die Rechnung ist kein Experiment . ung . 6 . 2331 Der Vorgang des R e ch n e n s vermittelt eben diese Anschau- eben die Sprache hier die nötige Anschauung liefert . die Anschauung brauche , muss dahin beantwortet werden , dass 6 . 233 Die Frage , ob man zur Lösung der mathematischen Probleme ihrer Bedeutungsgleichheit . ich die beiden Ausdrücke betrachte , nämlich vom Standpunkte 6 . 2323 Die Gleichung kennzeichnet nur den Standpunkt , von welchem denes bedeuten . ihre Bedeutung kenne , weiss ich , ob sie dasselbe oder verschie- zu können , muss ich ihre Bedeutung kennen : und indem ich b e h a u p t e n . Denn um etwas von ihrer Bedeutung behaupten 6 . 2322 Die Identität der Bedeutung zweier Ausdrücke lässt sich nicht auf seine Richtigkeit hin verglichen werden muss . ohne dass das , was sie ausdrücken , selbst mit den Tatsachen heisst ja nichts anderes , als dass ihre Richtigkeit einzusehen ist , 6 . 2321 Und , dass die Sätze der Mathematik bewiesen werden können , da sich dies aus den beiden Ausdrücken selbst ersehen lässt . das Gleichheitszeichen verbindet , dieselbe Bedeutung haben , LOGISCH-PHILOSOPHISCHE ABHANDLUNG 155 dass wir die Fläche mit einem gröberen Dreiecks-Netz genau- fe eines Dreiecks-Netzes einfacher geworden wäre ; das heisst , wenden können . Es kann sein , dass die Beschreibung mit Hil- folge ein Netz aus dreieckigen oder sechseckigen Maschen ver- Diese Form ist beliebig , denn ich hätte mit dem gleichen Er- bung der Fläche auf eine einheitliche Form gebracht haben . weiss oder schwarz ist . Ich werde auf diese Weise die Beschrei- Netzwerk bedecke und nun von jedem Quadrat sage , dass es ich die Fläche mit einem entsprechend feinen quadratischen kann ich seiner Beschreibung beliebig nahe kommen , indem gen nun : Was für ein Bild immer hierdurch entsteht , immer che , auf der unregelmässige schwarze Flecken wären . Wir sa- auf eine einheitliche Form . Denken wir uns eine weisse Flä- 6 . 341 Die Newtonsche Mechanik z . B . bringt die Weltbeschreibung bung der Sätze der Wissenschaft . alle diese sind Einsichten a priori über die mögliche Formge- in der Natur , vom kleinsten Aufwande in der Natur etc . etc . , 6 . 34 Alle jene Sätze , wie der Satz vom Grunde , von der Kontinuität wir w i s s e n a priori die Möglichkeit einer logischen Form . 6 . 33 Wir g l a u b e n nicht a priori an ein Erhaltungsgesetz , sondern Gewisse als etwas rein Logisches heraus . te , wie es lautete . Hier , wie immer , stellt sich das a priori setz der kleinsten Wirkung“ geben müsse , ehe man genau wuss- 6 . 3211 Man hat ja auch davon eine Ahnung gehabt , dass es e i n „Ge- Gesetze von der Kausalitätsform . kleinsten Wirkung—so gibt es in der Physik Kausalitätsgesetze , der Mechanik , sagen wir , Minimum-Gesetze gibt , —etwa der 6 . 321 „Kausalitätsgesetz“ , das ist ein Gattungsname . Und wie es in Gesetzes . 6 . 32 Das Kausalitätsgesetz ist kein Gesetz , sondern die Form eines Und darum kann es auch kein Gesetz a priori sein . gisches Gesetz sein , denn es ist offenbar ein sinnvoller Satz . — 6 . 31 Das sogenannte Gesetz der Induktion kann jedenfalls kein lo- fall . G e s e t z m ä s s i g ke i t . Und ausserhalb der Logik ist alles Zu- 6 . 3 Die Erforschung der Logik bedeutet die Erforschung a l l e r LOGISCH-PHILOSOPHISCHE ABHANDLUNG 156 6 . 35 Obwohl die Flecke in unserem Bild geometrische Figuren sind , immer nur von i r g e n d we l ch e n . nie von b e s t i m m t e n materiellen Punkten die Rede , sondern die Mechanik immer die ganz allgemeine ist . Es ist in ihr z . B . 6 . 3432 Wir dürfen nicht vergessen , dass die Weltbeschreibung durch physikalischen Gesetze doch von den Gegenständen der Welt . 6 . 3431 Durch den ganzen logischen Apparat hindurch sprechen die ren . Weltbeschreibung brauchen , nach Einem Plane zu konstruie- 6 . 343 Die Mechanik ist ein Versuch , alle wa h r e n Sätze , die wir zur die andere . durch die eine Mechanik einfacher beschreiben lässt , als durch der Fall ist . Auch das sagt etwas über die Welt , dass sie sich dass sie sich s o durch jene beschreiben lässt , wie dies eben durch die Newtonsche Mechanik beschreiben lässt ; wohl aber , So auch sagt es nichts über die Welt aus , dass sie sich von b e s t i m mt e r Feinheit v o l l s t ä n d i g beschreiben lässt . charakterisiert das Bild , dass es sich durch ein bestimmtes Netz aus . Denn dies gilt für jedes Bild dieser Art . Da s aber gegebener Form beschreiben lässt , sagt über das Bild n i cht s Dass sich ein Bild , wie das vorhin erwähnte , durch ein Netz von Figuren etwa aus Dreiecken und Sechsecken bestehen lassen . Mechanik . Man könnte das Netz auch aus verschiedenartigen 6 . 342 Und nun sehen wir die gegenseitige Stellung von Logik und der Physik hinschreiben können . muss man mit dem System der Mechanik jeden beliebigen Satz Wie man mit dem Zahlensystem jede beliebige Anzahl , so mit diesen und nur diesen Bausteinen zusammenbringen . Gebäude immer du aufführen willst , jedes musst du irgendwie zum Bau des wissenschaftlichen Gebäudes und sagt : Welches und Weise erhalten werden . Hierdurch liefert sie die Bausteine ner Sätze—den mechanischen Axiomen—auf eine gegebene Art Sätze der Weltbeschreibung müssen aus einer Anzahl gegebe- stimmt eine Form der Weltbeschreibung , indem sie sagt : Alle verschiedene Systeme der Weltbeschreibung . Die Mechanik be- oder umgekehrt ) usw . Den verschiedenen Netzen entsprechen er beschreiben könnten , als mit einem feineren quadratischen LOGISCH-PHILOSOPHISCHE ABHANDLUNG 157 Den rechten Handschuh könnte man an die linke Hand zu tun . dass man sie nicht zur Deckung bringen kann , hat damit nichts und linke Hand sind tatsächlich vollkommen kongruent . Und nen , ohne aus diesem Raum herausbewegt zu werden . Rechte Figuren aund bauch nicht zur Deckung gebracht werden kön- ne , ja im eindimensionalen Raum , wo die beiden kongruenten man nicht zur Deckung bringen kann , besteht schon in der Ebe- 6 . 36111 Das Kant’sche Problem von der rechten und linken Hand , die fens des einen und Nicht-Eintreffens des anderen auffassen . vorhanden i s t , so können wir diese als U r s a c h e des Eintref- Asymmetrie vorhanden ist . Und we n n eine solche Asymmetrie der beiden Ereignisse beschreiben kann , wenn nicht irgend eine delt es sich in Wirklichkeit darum , dass man gar nicht e i n e s warum das eine eher als das andere eintreten solle , da han- schliessen ) eintreten , weil ke i n e U r s a ch e vorhanden sei , könne keines von zwei Ereignissen die sich gegenseitig aus- Ganz Analoges gilt für den Raum . Wo man z . B . sagt , es möglich , dass wir uns auf einen anderen Vorgang stützen . Daher ist die Beschreibung des zeitlichen Verlaufs nur so Vorgang etwa mit dem Gang des Chronometers ) . chen—diesen gibt es nicht— , sondern nur mit einem anderen 6 . 3611 Wir können keinen Vorgang mit dem „Ablauf der Zeit“ verglei- s e t z m ä s s i g e Zusammenhänge sind d e n k b a r . 6 . 361 In der Ausdrucksweise Hertz’s könnte man sagen : Nur g e- Aber freilich kann man das nicht sagen : es zeigt sich . gibt Naturgesetze“ . 6 . 36 Wenn es ein Kausalitätsgesetz gäbe , so könnte es lauten : „Es nicht von dem , was das Netz beschreibt . Gesetze , wie der Satz vom Grunde , etc . , handeln vom Netz , werden . geometrisch , alle seine Eigenschaften können a priori angegeben ihre tatsächliche Form und Lage sagen . Das Netz aber ist r e i n so kann doch selbstverständlich die Geometrie gar nichts über LOGISCH-PHILOSOPHISCHE ABHANDLUNG 158 nur eine l o g i s ch e Unmöglichkeit . 6 . 375 Wie es nur eine l o g i s ch e Notwendigkeit gibt , so gibt es auch sammenhang könnten wir doch nicht selbst wieder wollen . der dies verbürgte , und den angenommenen physikalischen Zu- kein l o g i s ch e r Zusammenhang zwischen Willen und Welt , doch nur , sozusagen , eine Gnade des Schicksals , denn es ist 6 . 374 Auch wenn alles , was wir wünschen , geschähe , so wäre dies 6 . 373 Die Welt ist unabhängig von meinem Willen . als sei a l l e s erklärt . anerkennen , während es bei dem neuen System scheinen soll , sind allerdings insofern klarer , als sie einen klaren Abschluss Und sie haben ja beide Recht , und Unrecht . Die Alten barem stehen , wie die älteren bei Gott und dem Schicksal . 6 . 372 So bleiben sie bei den Naturgesetzen als bei etwas Unantast- Naturerscheinungen seien . grunde , dass die sogenannten Naturgesetze die Erklärungen der 6 . 371 Der ganzen modernen Weltanschauung liegt die Täuschung zu- s ch e Notwendigkeit . anderes geschehen ist , gibt es nicht . Es gibt nur eine l o g i - 6 . 37 Einen Zwang , nach dem Eines geschehen müsste , weil etwas das heisst : wir w i s s e n nicht , ob sie aufgehen wird . 6 . 36311 Dass die Sonne morgen aufgehen wird , ist eine Hypothese ; und werde nun auch wirklich der einfachste Fall eintreten . Es ist klar , dass kein Grund vorhanden ist , zu glauben , es chologische Begründung . 6 . 3631 Dieser Vorgang hat aber keine logische , sondern nur eine psy- Einklang zu bringen ist . f a ch s t e Gesetz annehmen , das mit unseren Erfahrungen in 6 . 363 Der Vorgang der Induktion besteht darin , dass wir das e i n - nicht beschreiben . das Kausalitätsgesetz ausschliessen soll , das lässt sich auch 6 . 362 Was sich beschreiben lässt , das kann auch geschehen , und was könnte . ziehen , wenn man ihn im vierdimensionalen Raum umdrehen LOGISCH-PHILOSOPHISCHE ABHANDLUNG 159 was muss doch an jener Fragestellung richtig sein . Es muss Mindesten dürfen diese Folgen nicht Ereignisse sein . Denn et- Frage nach den Fo l g e n einer Handlung belanglos sein . —Zum und Lohn im gewöhnlichen Sinne zu tun hat . Also muss diese nicht tue ? Es ist aber klar , dass die Ethik nichts mit Strafe von der Form „du sollst “ ist : Und was dann , wenn ich es 6 . 422 Der erste Gedanke bei der Aufstellung eines ethischen Gesetzes Ethik und Aesthetik sind Eins . Die Ethik ist transcendental . 6 . 421 Es ist klar , dass sich die Ethik nicht aussprechen lässt . Sätze können nichts Höheres ausdrücken . 6 . 42 Darum kann es auch keine Sätze der Ethik geben . Es muss ausserhalb der Welt liegen . denn sonst wäre dies wieder zufällig . Was es nicht-zufällig macht , kann nicht i n der Welt liegen , hen und So-Sein ist zufällig . halb alles Geschehens und So-Seins liegen . Denn alles Gesche- Wenn es einen Wert gibt , der Wert hat , so muss er ausser- Wert . i n ihr keinen Wert—und wenn es ihn gäbe , so hätte er keinen ist alles wie es ist und geschieht alles wie es geschieht ; es gibt 6 . 41 Der Sinn der Welt muss ausserhalb ihrer liegen . In der Welt 6 . 4 Alle Sätze sind gleichwertig . zwei verschiedene Farben hat , ist eine Kontradiktion . Die Aussage , dass ein Punkt des Gesichtsfeldes zu gleicher Zeit sätze weder eine Tautologie noch eine Kontradiktion sein kann . Es ist klar , dass das logische Produkt zweier Elementar- sein können . Teilchen an verschiedenen Orten zu Einer Zeit nicht identisch nicht zu gleicher Zeit an zwei Orten sein kann ; das heisst , dass Zeit zwei Geschwindigkeiten haben kann ; das heisst , dass es sik darstellt : Ungefähr so , dass ein Teilchen nicht zu gleicher Denken wir daran , wie sich dieser Widerspruch in der Phy- ist durch die logische Struktur der Farbe ausgeschlossen . des sind , ist unmöglich und zwar logisch unmöglich , denn es 6 . 3751 Dass z . B . zwei Farben zugleich an einem Ort des Gesichtsfel- LOGISCH-PHILOSOPHISCHE ABHANDLUNG 160 Gott offenbart sich nicht i n der Welt . 6 . 432 W i e die Welt ist , ist für das Höhere vollkommen gleichgültig . Nicht Probleme der Naturwissenschaft sind ja zu lösen . Zeit liegt a u s s e r h a l b von Raum und Zeit . gegenwärtige ? Die Lösung des Rätsels des Lebens in Raum und denn dieses ewige Leben dann nicht ebenso rätselhaft wie das denn dadurch ein Rätsel gelöst , dass ich ewig fortlebe ? Ist gar nicht das , was man immer mit ihr erreichen wollte . Wird keine Weise verbürgt , sondern vor allem leistet diese Annahme also ihr ewiges Fortleben auch nach dem Tode , ist nicht nur auf 6 . 4312 Die zeitliche Unsterblichkeit der Seele des Menschen , das heisst zenlos ist . Unser Leben ist ebenso endlos , wie unser Gesichtsfeld gren- Gegenwart lebt . dern Unzeitlichkeit versteht , dann lebt der ewig , der in der Wenn man unter Ewigkeit nicht unendliche Zeitdauer , son- nicht . 6 . 4311 Der Tod ist kein Ereignis des Lebens . Den Tod erlebt man hört . 6 . 431 Wie auch beim Tod die Welt sich nicht ändert , sondern auf- glücklichen . Die Welt des Glücklichen ist eine andere als die des Un- men . werden . Sie muss sozusagen als Ganzes abnehmen oder zuneh- Kurz , die Welt muss dann dadurch überhaupt eine andere das , was durch die Sprache ausgedrückt werden kann . nur die Grenzen der Welt ändern , nicht die Tatsachen ; nicht 6 . 43 Wenn das gute oder böse Wollen die Welt ändert , so kann es gie . Und der Wille als Phänomen interessiert nur die Psycholo- chen werden . 6 . 423 Vom Willen als dem Träger des Ethischen kann nicht gespro- die Strafe etwas Unangenehmes sein muss . Und das ist auch klar , dass der Lohn etwas Angenehmes , aber diese müssen in der Handlung selbst liegen . zwar eine Art von ethischem Lohn und ethischer Strafe geben , LOGISCH-PHILOSOPHISCHE ABHANDLUNG 161 hat . Diese Methode wäre für den anderen unbefriedigend—er gewissen Zeichen in seinen Sätzen keine Bedeutung gegeben Metaphysisches sagen wollte , ihm nachzuweisen , dass er zu tun hat— , und dann immer , wenn ein anderer etwas Naturwissenschaft—also etwas , was mit Philosophie nichts Nichts zu sagen , als was sich sagen lässt , also Sätze der 6 . 53 Die richtige Methode der Philosophie wäre eigentlich die : das Mystische . 6 . 522 Es gibt allerdings Unaussprechliches . Dies ze ig t sich , es ist nicht sagen konnten , worin dieser Sinn bestand . des Lebens nach langen Zweifeln klar wurde , warum diese dann Ist nicht dies der Grund , warum Menschen , denen der Sinn schwinden dieses Problems . 6 . 521 Die Lösung des Problems des Lebens merkt man am Ver- mehr ; und eben dies ist die Antwort . gar nicht berührt sind . Freilich bleibt dann eben keine Frage lichen Fragen beantwortet sind , unsere Lebensprobleme noch 6 . 52 Wir fühlen , dass selbst , wenn alle m ö g l i ch e n wissenschaft- etwas g e s a g t werden ka n n . eine Frage nur , wo eine Antwort besteht , und diese nur , wo Denn Zweifel kann nur bestehen , wo eine Frage besteht ; nig , wenn er bezweifeln will , wo nicht gefragt werden kann . 6 . 51 Skeptizismus ist n i cht unwiderleglich , sondern offenbar unsin- auch beantwortet werden . Wenn sich eine Frage überhaupt stellen lässt , so ka n n sie D a s R ä t s e l gibt es nicht . auch die Frage nicht aussprechen . 6 . 5 Zu einer Antwort , die man nicht aussprechen kann , kann man sche . Das Gefühl der Welt als begrenztes Ganzes ist das mysti- ung als—begrenztes—Ganzes . 6 . 45 Die Anschauung der Welt sub specie aeterni ist ihre Anschau- ist . 6 . 44 Nicht w i e die Welt ist , ist das Mystische , sondern d a s s sie 6 . 4321 Die Tatsachen gehören alle nur zur Aufgabe , nicht zur Lösung . LOGISCH-PHILOSOPHISCHE ABHANDLUNG 162 7 Wovon man nicht sprechen kann , darüber muss man schweigen . richtig . Er muss diese Sätze überwinden , dann sieht er die Welt Leiter wegwerfen , nachdem er auf ihr hinaufgestiegen ist . ihnen—über sie hinausgestiegen ist . Er muss sozusagen die steht , am Ende als unsinnig erkennt , wenn er durch sie—auf 6 . 54 Meine Sätze erläutern dadurch , dass sie der , welcher mich ver- s i e wäre die einzig streng richtige . hätte nicht das Gefühl , dass wir ihn Philosophie lehrten—aber LOGISCH-PHILOSOPHISCHE ABHANDLUNG 9 AND 11 YOUNG STREET , EDINBURGH . PRINTED IN GREAT BRITAIN BY THE EDINBURGH PRESS , a the terms of this agreement , you must cease using and return or destroy trademark / copyright ) agreement . If you do not agree to abide by all and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property electronic work , you indicate that you have read , understand , agree to 1 . A . By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works Section 1 . General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm http : gutenberg . org / license ) . Gutenberg-tm License available with this file or online at Gutenberg" ) , you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project distribution of electronic works , by using or distributing this work To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE *** START : FULL LICENSE *** redistribution . subject to the trademark license , especially commercial practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks . Redistribution is research . They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do such as creation of derivative works , reports , performances and rules is very easy . You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose do not charge anything for copies of this eBook , complying with the charge for the eBooks , unless you receive specific permission . If you Gutenberg is a registered trademark , and may not be used if you protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark . Project copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license , apply to permission and without paying copyright royalties . Special rules , and you ! ) can copy and distribute it in the United States without one owns a United States copyright in these works , so the Foundation Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no will be renamed . Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions Distributed Proofreading Team at http : www . pgdp . net Produced by Jana Srna , Norbert H . Langkau , and the Online http : www . gutenberg . org / 5 / 7 / 4 / 5740 / This and all associated files of various formats will be found in : ***** This file should be named 5740-pdf . pdf or 5740-pdf . zip ***** *** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK TRACTATUS LOGICO-PHILOSOPHICUS *** Ludwig Wittgenstein End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Tractatus Logico-Philosophicus , by b with this eBook or online at www . gutenberg . org re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included almost no restrictions whatsoever . You may copy it , give it away or This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with copied or distributed : Gutenberg" is associated ) is accessed , displayed , performed , viewed , phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears , or with which the phrase "Project whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work any work on which the access to , the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently 1 . E . 1 . The following sentence , with active links to , or other immediate 1 . E . Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg : States . the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United Gutenberg-tm work . The Foundation makes no representations concerning creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project before downloading , copying , displaying , performing , distributing or the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement a constant state of change . If you are outside the United States , check what you can do with this work . Copyright laws in most countries are in 1 . D . The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others . keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project the work . You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by are removed . Of course , we hope that you will support the Project works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg copying , distributing , performing , displaying or creating derivative located in the United States , we do not claim a right to prevent you from individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are collection are in the public domain in the United States . If an Gutenberg-tm electronic works . Nearly all the individual works in the or PGLAF ) , owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project 1 . C . The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation "the Foundation" works . See paragraph 1 . E below . and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement paragraph 1 . C below . There are a lot of things you can do with Project even without complying with the full terms of this agreement . See things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement . There are a few used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who 1 . B . "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark . It may only be entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1 . E . 8 . terms of this agreement , you may obtain a refund from the person or Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession . c prepare or are legally required to prepare ) your periodic tax must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation . Royalty payments has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark , but he you already use to calculate your applicable taxes . The fee is the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method - You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from that access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided 1 . E . 8 . You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing unless you comply with paragraph 1 . E . 8 or 1 . E . 9 . performing , copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works 1 . E . 7 . Do not charge a fee for access to , viewing , displaying , License as specified in paragraph 1 . E . 1 . form . Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm request , of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other copy , a means of exporting a copy , or a means of obtaining a copy upon you must , at no additional cost , fee or expense to the user , provide a posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site www . gutenberg . org ) , "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than word processing or hypertext form . However , if you provide access to or compressed , marked up , nonproprietary or proprietary form , including any 1 . E . 6 . You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary , Gutenberg-tm License . active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1 . E . 1 with electronic work , or any part of this electronic work , without 1 . E . 5 . Do not copy , display , perform , distribute or redistribute this work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm . License terms from this work , or any files containing a part of this 1 . E . 4 . Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work . to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the terms imposed by the copyright holder . Additional terms will be linked must comply with both paragraphs 1 . E . 1 through 1 . E . 7 and any additional with the permission of the copyright holder , your use and distribution 1 . E . 3 . If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted 1 . E . 9 . Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1 . E . 8 or through 1 . E . 7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the work , you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1 . E . 1 with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the or charges . If you are redistributing or providing access to a work and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees posted with permission of the copyright holder ) , the work can be copied from the public domain does not contain a notice indicating that it is 1 . E . 2 . If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived d 1 . F . 3 . LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a DAMAGE . INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL , DIRECT , INDIRECT , CONSEQUENTIAL , PUNITIVE OR TRADEMARK OWNER , AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1 . F . 3 . YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION , THE LIABILITY , BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE fees . YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE , STRICT liability to you for damages , costs and expenses , including legal Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement , disclaim all Gutenberg-tm trademark , and any other party distributing a Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation , the owner of the Project of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1 . F . 3 , the Project 1 . F . 2 . LIMITED WARRANTY , DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right your equipment . computer virus , or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by property infringement , a defective or damaged disk or other medium , a corrupt data , transcription errors , a copyright or other intellectual "Defects , " such as , but not limited to , incomplete , inaccurate or works , and the medium on which they may be stored , may contain collection . Despite these efforts , Project Gutenberg-tm electronic public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm effort to identify , do copyright research on , transcribe and proofread 1 . F . 1 . Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable 1 . F . Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below . Hart , the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark . Contact the both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael forth in this agreement , you must obtain permission in writing from electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set 1 . E . 9 . If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works . - You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free of receipt of the work . electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days money paid for a work or a replacement copy , if a defect in the - You provide , in accordance with paragraph 1 . F . 3 , a full refund of any Project Gutenberg-tm works . and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium License . You must require such a user to return or does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm you in writing or by e-mail ) within 30 days of receipt that s / he - You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation . " address specified in Section 4 , "Information about donations to sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the returns . Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and e and the Foundation web page at http : www . pglaf . org . and how your efforts and donations can help , see Sections 3 and 4 To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations . Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure remain freely available for generations to come . In 2001 , the Project goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will assistance they need , are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm’s Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the people in all walks of life . because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from including obsolete , old , middle-aged and new computers . It exists electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of Section 2 . Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm Project Gutenberg-tm work , and c ) any Defect you cause . work , b ) alteration , modification , or additions or deletions to any or cause to occur : a ) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do harmless from all liability , costs and expenses , including legal fees , promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works , with this agreement , and any volunteers associated with the production , providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance trademark owner , any agent or employee of the Foundation , anyone 1 . F . 6 . INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation , the provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions . the applicable state law . The invalidity or unenforceability of any interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by law of the state applicable to this agreement , the agreement shall be If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages . 1 . F . 5 . Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE . WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND , EXPRESS OR IMPLIED , INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO in paragraph 1 . F . 3 , this work is provided to you ’AS-IS’ WITH NO OTHER 1 . F . 4 . Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth opportunities to fix the problem . is also defective , you may demand a refund in writing without further receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund . If the second copy providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to refund . If you received the work electronically , the person or entity the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a your written explanation . The person or entity that provided you with received the work on a physical medium , you must return the medium with written explanation to the person you received the work from . If you receive a refund of the money if any ) you paid for it by sending a defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it , you can f Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation outside the United States . U . S . laws alone swamp our small staff . any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from International donations are gratefully accepted , but we cannot make approach us with offers to donate . against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who have not met the solicitation requirements , we know of no prohibition While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we particular state visit http : pglaf . org SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any where we have not received written confirmation of compliance . To with these requirements . We do not solicit donations in locations considerable effort , much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up States . Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating status with the IRS . $1 to $5 , 000 ) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt array of equipment including outdated equipment . Many small donations freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide Literary Archive Foundation Section 4 . Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg gbnewby@pglaf . org Chief Executive and Director Dr . Gregory B . Newby For additional contact information : page at http : pglaf . org information can be found at the Foundation’s web site and official business@pglaf . org . Email contact links and up to date contact 809 North 1500 West , Salt Lake City , UT 84116 , 801 ) 596-1887 , email throughout numerous locations . Its business office is located at Fairbanks , AK , 99712 . , but its volunteers and employees are scattered The Foundation’s principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr . S . permitted by U . S . federal laws and your state’s laws . Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent http : pglaf . org / fundraising . Contributions to the Project Gutenberg number is 64-6221541 . Its 501 ( c ) ( 3 ) letter is posted at Revenue Service . The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal 501 ( c ) ( 3 ) educational corporation organized under the laws of the The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit Foundation Section 3 . Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive g subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks . Archive Foundation , how to help produce our new eBooks , and how to including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm , http : www . gutenberg . org Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility : keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition . unless a copyright notice is included . Thus , we do not necessarily editions , all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U . S . Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support . with anyone . For thirty years , he produced and distributed Project concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared Professor Michael S . Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm works . Section 5 . General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic To donate , please visit : http : pglaf . org / donate ways including checks , online payments and credit card donations . methods and addresses . Donations are accepted in a number of other